____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Russia July 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-russia-july-2022/docview/2714191742/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Economic outlook 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 4.7 -10.0 -2.6 1.6 1.8 1.4 Consumer price inflation (av, %) 6.7 21.2 12.1 6.4 5.1 4.0 Budget balance (% of GDP) 0.4 -3.8 -4.8 -3.9 -3.3 -3.2 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 6.9 10.1 7.7 6.5 6.7 6.4 Central bank refinancing rate (end-period; %) 6.0 10.5 6.3 7.2 4.8 3.9 Exchange rate Rb:US$ (av) 73.7 75.3 82.7 88.6 90.7 93.1 EIU expects the combined impact of war and sanctions to result in a deep recession in 2022. Outdated capital stock, a declining workforce, dependence on natural-resource sectors, institutional weaknesses, poor productivity growth, a difficult business environment, statist policies and economic sanctions will impose large growth constraints. An unfavourable demographic profile, difficult business environment and fragile banking system, along with poor policymaking and an overreliance on natural resources will place constraints on Russia's long-term growth. Fact sheet Annual data 2021a Historical averages (%) 2017-21 Population (m) 148.9 Population growth 0.1 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 1,771.1 Real GDP growth 1.7 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 4,773 Real domestic demand growth 2.3 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 11,892 Inflation 4.2 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 32,046 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.4 Exchange rate (av) Rb:US$ 73.7 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.1 a Actual.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Russia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Russia+July+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-07-15&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Russia&amp;rft.issn=13518720&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - The war in Ukraine will unleash a period of deep political transformation in Russia, which we expect to become increasingly more authoritarian and anti-Western. Vladimir Putin was comfortably re-elected for a fourth term as president in March 2018, and he is likely to consolidate his power further, relying on forceful means to silence dissent. Amendments to the Russian constitution, which Mr Putin instigated in January 2020, will allow him to run for a fifth term in 2024, when his current tenure expires. Elections will become a mere formality, with competition and pluralism eliminated. We expect security questions to be prioritised over economic ones in the 2022-26 forecast period as conservative forces grow to dominate economic policymaking.

Russia--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.47 4.33 58 75 12 15
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.

- Russia's score deteriorates in the forecast period. This is primarily driven by the war in Ukraine and associated sanctions, which will weigh on the overall business environment. We have downgraded scores for foreign trade and exchange controls, policy towards foreign investment, policy towards private enterprise and competition, and market opportunities. The best-performing categories, instead, are expected to be technological readiness, the macroeconomic environment and the labour market. Western sanctions, loss of trade and the government's increased control over the economy means there is little scope for improvement in the score throughout the forecast period.

Russia--highlights: Economic outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 4.7 -10.0 -2.6 1.6 1.8 1.4
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 6.7 21.2 12.1 6.4 5.1 4.0
Budget balance (% of GDP) 0.4 -3.8 -4.8 -3.9 -3.3 -3.2
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 6.9 10.1 7.7 6.5 6.7 6.4
Central bank refinancing rate (end-period; %) 6.0 10.5 6.3 7.2 4.8 3.9
Exchange rate Rb:US$ (av) 73.7 75.3 82.7 88.6 90.7 93.1

- EIU expects the combined impact of war and sanctions to result in a deep recession in 2022. Government spending will increase as the state finances the war, but private consumption and fixed investment will take a strong hit and imports will be compressed. In 2023 we forecast that the economy will contract further, before returning to positive growth in 2014. The recovery in the medium-term will be weak, and subsequent years will see sluggish growth. Outdated capital stock, a declining workforce, dependence on natural-resource sectors, institutional weaknesses, poor productivity growth, a difficult business environment, statist policies and economic sanctions will impose large growth constraints.

Russia--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2016 2021 2026
Total 148.3 148.9 147.8
 Male 68.7 69.0 68.6
 Female 79.6 79.9 79.3
Period averages (%)   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth   0.1 -0.2
Working-age population growth   -0.6 -0.6
Labour force growth   -0.3 -0.6

- The population is forecast to decline over the forecast period and beyond, which is a significant impediment to growth prospects. Russia faces a demographic challenge resulting from low birth rates, low life expectancy (compared with Western countries), high emigration and an ageing population. The war in Ukraine will probably worsen these trends. Outside low-skilled sectors, gaps in the labour market are expected to be tight, with implications for inflation and productivity. An ageing workforce will push up pension and healthcare costs significantly.

Russia--highlights: Market opportunities   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,771 1,915 1,909 1,897 1,955 1,991
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 11,892 12,869 12,842 12,779 13,195 13,467
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 934 953 1,015 1,046 1,108 1,173
Household consumption (US$ bn) 889 910 960 977 1,013 1,046
Household consumption per head (US$) 5,970 6,110 6,460 6,580 6,840 7,080

- The presence of heavy Western sanctions will make Russia's economy less open and less market-oriented. The government is likely to enact more protectionist policies throughout our forecast period, including export restrictions and import substitution. Western sanctions are likely to have severe implications on those sectors of the economy that rely on imported component and foreign investment. Personal disposable incomes will take a hit in 2022-26. There will be significant regional variation, with some urban centres, in particular the capital, Moscow, recording higher income and consumption growth rates, in line with historical trends.

Russia--highlights: Long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head -0.3 1.7 1.1
Growth of real GDP -0.5 1.4 0.8
Labour productivity growth -0.1 1.8 1.2

- We forecast average real GDP growth of 0.8% and real GDP growth per head of 1.1% in 2022-50. An unfavourable demographic profile, difficult business environment and fragile banking system, along with poor policymaking and an overreliance on natural resources will place constraints on Russia's long-term growth. Given its strong industrial tradition, Russia's chances of diversifying its economy could in theory be strong, but this potential is unlikely to be realised, following a sharp deterioration in political and economic relations with the West and structurally low investment levels.

Fact sheet Annual data 2021 a Historical averages (%) 2017-21
Population (m) 148.9 Population growth 0.1
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 1,771.1 Real GDP growth 1.7
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 4,773 Real domestic demand growth 2.3
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 11,892 Inflation 4.2
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 32,046 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.4
Exchange rate (av) Rb:US$ 73.7 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.1
a Actual.
Background: The transition to a market economy in the early 1990s was accompanied by a collapse in industrial production and a sharp drop in living standards. A contested privatisation process led to a highly concentrated ownership structure. Executive weakness and bureaucratic dysfunction contributed to a sharp decentralisation of power. After becoming president in 2000, Vladimir Putin sought to restore central control over the regions and tame independent corporate interests. In his first two terms, Mr Putin presided over a period of strong economic growth. His re-election in 2012 and 2018 has coincided with the development of a more authoritarian domestic environment.
Political structure: The powers of the executive were greatly increased by a new constitution, adopted in 1993. Mr Putin was elected president in 2000 and in 2004, during which time there was increasing centralisation of the state. After switching roles in 2008 with a loyal ally, Dmitry Medvedev, Mr Putin returned to the presidency for a third term in 2012 and was re-elected to a fourth in 2018. His constitutional reform was approved by parliament in March 2020 and by a referendum in July. This strengthened the power of the presidency and revamped the State Council-previously an advisory body-and includes provisions for Russian courts to ignore foreign rulings. The changes allow Mr Putin to remain in power for 12 additional years after his current term ends in 2024, although it remains unclear whether he will actually do so.
Policy issues: During Mr Putin's third term, greater emphasis was placed on conservative values, anti-Westernism and great power nationalism. The invasion of Ukraine has isolated Russia from the West and it will continue to be under pressure from stringent sanctions. This will lead to the state taking an increased role in the economy as the private sector is weakened under sanctions and foreign investment is unlikely to be forthcoming.
Taxation: Reforms since 2000 have aimed to rationalise the tax system, and cut the number of taxes and the corporate tax burden. Changes to the tax regime in 2001 included the introduction of a flat rate of personal income tax of 13% and a simplification of the administration of social-security contributions. The corporate tax rate was cut from 24% to 20% in 2009. In 2019 the basic rate of value-added tax (VAT) rose from 18% to 20%. A 15% rate of income tax on wealthier Russians and a tax on interest from deposits worth more than Rb1m (US$16,500) were recently introduced.
Foreign Trade: In 2021 merchandise exports totalled US$493.8bn, and imports US$304bn. The current-account balance registered a record surplus of US$122bn, or 6.9% of GDP. Oil and gas accounted for about 62% of Russia's exports, with metals contributing just over 12%. Russia's largest trading partners are the EU and China.
Main exports 2020 % of total Main imports 2020 % of total
Oil, fuel & gas 51.3 Machinery & equipment 47.6
Metals 19.4 Chemicals 18.3
Machinery & equipment 7.5 Food & agricultural products 12.8
Chemicals 7.1 Metals 7.2
       
Major markets 2021 % of total Major suppliers 2021 % of total
China 13.9 China 24.8
Netherlands 8.6 Germany 9.3
Germany 6.0 US 6.0
Turkey 5.4 Belarus 5.3
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance Vladimir Putin was re-elected for a fourth term as president in March 2018. The government's decision-making lies with a small group of elites within the presidential administration, with Mr Putin acting as the final arbiter between Russia's powerful interest groups. Most political powers are attached to the presidential administration, including command of the armed forces and the right to appoint most of the important posts in the executive and judiciary.

Russia has taken an authoritarian turn since Mr Putin first two terms in office (2000-08). For years the political system sought to use elections as a legitimising tool without risking the stability of the regime. However, the government is increasingly relying on more blunt instruments of state repression to achieve its objectives. Mass detainments of protesters have become standard practice for the authorities in recent years. Systemic opposition structures, which the Kremlin used to tolerate to an extent, have now been completely dismantled after the authorities outlawed them under extremism laws in June 2021. Alexei Navalny, a prominent opposition activist, was sentenced to additional nine years' high-security imprisonment in March 2022 after already serving a 2.5-year sentence. As a result, the opposition has become more fragmented, without a clear authority and lacking a national political strategy.

At the latest parliamentary election in September 2021, United Russia, which is in effect controlled by the presidential administration, gained a constitutional majority, winning 49.8% of the vote and 324 of the 450 seats in the State Duma (the lower house). The election was marred by fraud claims by opponents and a restrictive political environment in the run-up to the election, which led to the absence of observers from the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) for the first time since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Russia's invasion of Ukraine has increased the country's autocratic tendencies, and EIU expects United Russia and Mr Putin to become less reliant on elections as a form of political legitimacy.

Mr Putin's succession problem remains unresolved. Amendments to the Russian constitution, passed in 2020, will allow him to remain in power beyond the end of his current term in 2024. However, he will be 72 in 2024 and he may choose to step down after selecting an appropriate successor.

Parliamentary election, September 2021
  Seats won
United Russia 324
Communist Party of the Russian Federation 57
Liberal Democratic Party of Russia 21
Just Russia 27
New People 13
Other 8
Source: Central Electoral Commission of the Russian Federation.


Presidential election, March 2018
  % of vote
Vladimir Putin 76.69
Pavel Grudinin 11.77
Vladimir Zhirinovsky 5.65
Ksenia Sobchak 1.68
Gregory Yavlinsky 1.05
Boris Titov 0.76
Maxim Suraykin 0.68
Sergei Baburin 0.65
Note. Figures do not sum to 100, owing to spoiled ballots.
Source: Central Electoral Commission of the Russian Federation.
Political outlook: Political stability Domestic politics will be dominated in the short term by Russia's invasion of Ukraine, launched on February 24th. The exigencies of war will result in the ruling elite and sections of the population rallying around Mr Putin, to present a united front against the West. As the war progresses, risks to political stability are likely to increase. The outbreak of war led to spontaneous protests in many Russian cities. Thousands were detained as the government cracked down on all types of dissent. We expect public disaffection with the war to grow as the economic and humanitarian costs mount. Fallout from the unprecedented Western sanctions will hit ordinary consumers, and the government will have few tools with which to support household incomes. This may fuel discontent and allow anger at deteriorating socioeconomic conditions to coalesce with other grievances over corruption and repression into a broader anti-regime mood. The longer the war lasts, the more likely this will be, but, even if it ends relatively quickly, it will probably generate problems in the longer term.
To pre-empt more anti-war protests, the authorities will institute a harsh law-and-order crackdown, punishing repeated gestures of dissent with the maximum penalties, including long prison terms. People who express anti-war sentiment risk loss of income and detention, and those found to be helping Ukraine in any way could be charged with treason. The government has blocked independent media outlets, restricted social-media use and targeted schools with anti-protest propaganda. On the basis of recent trends, we expect Russia to move in an even more authoritarian direction in the coming years.
We see the political situation moving in one of two possible directions as a result of the conflict. On the one hand, the harsh official crackdown on dissent and protest will discourage people from taking action and demoralise the opposition, despite underlying public discontent. This will allow Mr Putin to remain in power, concentrating greater authority in his hands and moving Russia closer to a dictatorship. On the other hand, the costs of war could eventually lead to a groundswell of discontent that spreads beyond the usual, small opposition circles. This could encourage challenges to Mr Putin from within the elite, eventually resulting in a transition of power. We believe the first scenario to be more likely. Having been in power for two decades, Mr Putin appears to be in a strong position, and any challenge to him could unleash a period of protracted political instability. If Russia were to suffer major political upheaval, the consequences for the entire region would be huge, resulting in immense and violent destabilising changes.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness Although constitutionally Russia is a semi-presidential federation, in fact the presidential administration exercises sweeping powers over all levels of politics. Since Mr Putin came to power in 2000, he has strengthened the power of the central government at the expense of regional autonomy. The highly centralised policymaking, coupled with weak institutions and inefficient bureaucracy, means that policy implementation often produces mixed results. The government has long faced serious challenges in having its policy implemented except through "manual control", in which leading officials, or Mr Putin himself, take direct responsibility for the implementation of policy. Mr Putin has often allocated specific personal and ministerial responsibilities. However, this personalisation of the policymaking process has only reinforced informal practices. Weak institutions make policymaking vulnerable to lobbying by powerful political-economic groups. Government legislation, or even executive orders from the president, do not necessarily change practices on the ground.
The war will have ramifications on institutional effectiveness in Russia as it will spur friction in relation to policy priorities. The conflict has exacerbated differences between the conservative, anti-liberal and anti-Western elite on the one hand, who prioritise security concerns to the disadvantage of economic ones, and the more economically liberal technocrats on the other. In the past, tensions between these two groups have often resulted in disagreement over public spending. We expect Western sanctions to remain in place in 2022-26 and possibly beyond, which will further marginalise the market-oriented and liberal elite. A wider fiscal deficit in 2022-26 will put significant pressure on allocation of resources, stalling the decision-making progress and potentially fuelling popular discontent in remote regions, many of which are not self-sustainable and are likely to be disproportionally affected by public spending cuts.
Rollback on digitalisation will impact the quality of public administration The quality of public administration is likely to worsen in 2022-26. Russia already suffers from problems common to countries that have inherited the administrative tradition of the Soviet Union, notably a fragmented administrative apparatus, with overlapping jurisdiction and lines of authority. These factors have made public institutions prone to corruption, which is endemic across all levels of power and administration. Although the number of bureaucrats is not particularly large compared with OECD standards, the number of beneficiaries of unofficial payments is sizeable and, in many cases, bribes are seen as essential to the administrative process. Tight public finances as a result of sanctions will limit Russia's ability to boost public wages (although this will probably still be a priority), which will foster more conditions for corruption. Lack of investment will also hamper digitalisation, which is vital to improve transparency and the efficiency of public services. In Russia the digitalisation of the public sector is outlined in a national programme running until 2024, which encompasses 60 departmental programmes. Early findings have highlighted low rates of computerisation, weak internet infrastructure and the technical unpreparedness of public officials, and more investment is required to carry out digital transformations.
Western firms could be subject to expropriation and contract alteration The court system will remain slow, underfunded, and open to political influence and capture by private interests. Courts tend to favour state interests and are likely to rule in favour of state-affiliated business. Corporate "raiding", in which companies use law-enforcement services and/or the judiciary to seize the business of a competitor or to silence a businessman deemed to be a danger to the stability of the state, is a significant risk to doing business. The decision in 2013 to merge the Supreme Arbitration Court, which ruled on business disputes, with the Supreme Court, which oversees criminal and civil disputes, represented a further setback to judicial independence. The arbitration courts were separated from the general court system in the 1990s and had built up a track record of upholding property rights and supporting corporate governance. With Russia's relations with the West at near historic lows as a result of the war in Ukraine, Western companies are likely to be subject to pressure from the state, contract alterations and potential expropriation. Corruption in the judiciary remains widespread. Tackling corruption would require deep structural and regulatory reforms, which could prove highly disruptive, and we do not expect the government to embark on such a path.
Political outlook: Election watch The latest parliamentary election was held in September 2021. United Russia won 49.8% of the vote. The party currently holds 324 seats in the State Duma (the lower house) out of 450 (compared with 343 previously). With a comfortable two-thirds majority, United Russia will continue to be able to amend the constitution, at the instruction of Mr Putin. The war in Ukraine may prompt Mr Putin to restrict the powers of parliament further in order to minimise risks to his position. This weakening of the legislature would result in it becoming even more of a rubber-stamp body. As Mr Putin further consolidates his grip on power, elections could become a mere formality, with competition and pluralism eliminated. As in other post-Soviet dictatorships, the party system could either be weakened in favour of loyalist "independents" or, in effect, transformed into a one-party system.
Political outlook: International relations On February 24th Russia invaded Ukraine with the stated goal of defeating and demilitarising the country, bringing more of it under Russian control, most probably in the east and south. This would put a stop to Ukraine's aspirations to join NATO and create a buffer between Russia and the West. It is extremely difficult to predict how long the war will last, but we expect it to be protracted, lasting through 2022 and probably beyond. Having failed to make progress in the north, Russia has now concentrated its military campaign in the south and east of Ukraine. Over the medium term, prospects of a durable peace in Ukraine would appear small, even if there were a negotiated end to the current conflict. In the first few days of the war, we identified four potential scenarios for how it might proceed:

- Russia succeeds in its objective of defeating Ukraine and annexing part of the country under its direct control. Mr Putin has shown that he is willing to go to great lengths to achieve this goal, including by using lethal force against the civilian population of Ukraine.
- A Russian defeat. Russia's military forces are fighting on hostile terrain against a committed opponent. The risk of the army becoming disorganised and demoralised in the face of staunch Ukrainian resistance is considerable. If this were to coincide with growing economic and political destabilisation at home, Russian forces could be forced to retreat to the east. Such an outcome would have damaging consequences for Mr Putin's regime.
- A negotiated solution brokered by an outside power that is acceptable to both sides. This could come about if the war drags on and reaches a stalemate, with Ukraine seeking to limit the human cost and Russia looking for a way out that allows it to realise some of its war aims.
- An highly unlikely scenario would entail the overthrow of the elected government and the installation of a puppet regime backed by an occupying army. Such an outcome would entail a permanent war of occupation.

In the months since the invasion, Ukraine and Russia have engaged in several rounds of negotiations, mainly under Turkish mediation. We do not see the negotiations as meaningful and do not expect them to yield results in the short term. For Russia, a result that can be presented as a success in the war is crucial both from a geopolitical and domestic perspective. If Russia were to be defeated, the global balance of power would shift heavily in the West's favour. In addition, such a turn of events would be highly unpopular at home and could unleash major instability. The stakes for both sides are very high, which makes a negotiated settlement hard to achieve. Even if a ceasefire is eventually reached, we do not expect it to herald a permanent peace in Ukraine.
As a result of the invasion, Russia is facing unprecedented global isolation and has few allies. Western powers have imposed multi-layered sanctions on Russia, targeting the economy and its ability to absorb shocks. In addition to sanctions on Russia's foreign-exchange reserves, asset freezes and the exclusion of some banks from SWIFT, the global payments system, the most recent sanctions packages have severely disrupted Russian trade. On May 30th the EU agreed to pursue a partial oil embargo on Russia and a ban on insurance related to shipping oil to third countries. All forms of Russian coal have also been banned from the EU, and the bloc has pledged to reduce demand for Russian gas by 2027, although a total embargo is unlikely, owing to its significant economic implications. Exports of hi-tech equipment, computing and artificial intelligence technology, and semiconductors from Europe and the US to Russia have been restricted. Additional sanctions are likely as the war progresses. Even if Russia were to stop its attack on Ukraine, we expect that most sanctions would remain in place in 2022-26 as a deterrent against further aggression.
The war will be decisive in shaping Russia's future relations with China, which is wary of aligning itself with any action that undermines the principle of national sovereignty, a core tenet of the Chinese state. China is treading a careful path in the conflict and seeking to maintain a neutral official position. It has even proposed a ceasefire. However, China shares Russia's resentment at being excluded from playing a role in the US-led global security order and may tacitly support the undermining of the post-war international order that this event implies. China will be careful to avoid doing anything that could jeopardise its close economic ties with the US and the EU or expose it to secondary sanctions. However, it may covertly provide economic and financial support for Russia, which has been cut off from international financial markets.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
Overall position 5.47 4.33 58 75 12 15
Political environment 4.1 2.9 70 78 14 15
 Political stability 4.8 3.3 68 74 14 15
 Political effectiveness 3.6 2.6 64 79 12 15
Macroeconomic environment 7.2 5.8 40 61 8 14
Market opportunities 6.9 5.6 7 53 2 7
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 3.3 2.0 74 80 13 16
Policy towards foreign investment 3.3 1.0 77 82 16 16
Foreign trade & exchange controls 6.9 4.2 55 79 12 16
Taxes 5.3 4.9 62 77 14 15
Financing 4.8 3.3 65 75 12 15
The labour market 6.6 5.9 27 57 5 14
Infrastructure 4.5 5.0 62 67 15 15
Technological readiness 7.5 7.2 27 38 3 7
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
Russia's score in EIU's business environment rankings declines markedly over the forecast period (2022-26), to 4.33 out of 10, from 5.47 in the historical period (2017-21). As a result, it slips from 58th to 75th out of 82 countries in the global ranking, and drops three places in the regional ranking to 15th out of 16 countries. The biggest declines will be recorded in the scores relating to foreign trade and exchange controls, policy towards foreign investment, policy towards private enterprise and competition, and market opportunities. The sharp deterioration in the operating environment for business in these areas is due to the full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 and the stringent financial and trade sanctions imposed by the West and its allies in response. The sanctions have created major barriers to cross-border transactions. The war in Ukraine has damaged the medium-term outlook for Russia's political stability. It has also significantly reduced market opportunities. Western sanctions are expected to remain in place throughout the forecast period and probably beyond.
The political and policy environment weigh on Russia's overall score The best-performing categories over the forecast period are expected to be technological readiness, the macroeconomic environment, and the labour market. This reflects the high levels of education of the workforce, particularly relative to wage levels. However, Russia's commitment to technological development will be constrained by budget considerations, trade restrictions on dual-use equipment and microelectronics as well as an exodus of IT specialists.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Russia's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: The war in Ukraine and international sanctions lead to an increase in the state's control over the economy
2024-26: State involvement in the economy remains significantly higher than before 2022, deterring and limiting competition in most sectors.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: High political risk and international sanctions deter new foreign investment.
2024-26: The government remains interested in foreign investment, particularly from non-Western states. A range of incentives to encourage localisation and green-field investment will be developed.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: Western sanctions remain in place, seriously complicating all cross-border transactions.
2024-26: New infrastructure and special-purpose intermediaries will partly ease supply-chain bottlenecks. However, the cost of cross-border transactions remains elevated.
Taxes 2022-23: The government uses the tax system to provide targeted support to some sectors.
2024-26: The tax burden is likely to rise and there is an increased risk of windfall taxes on the commodity sector.
Financing 2022-23: International financial sanctions will effectively block all access to international capital markets; access to financing is effectively closed.
2024-26: The banking system remains state-dominated, distorting capital allocation. Companies continue to rely heavily on retained profits to finance investment.
The labour market 2022-23: Emigration will reduce the availability of highly qualified staff in some sectors, such as IT.
2024-26: The size of the local workforce declines, further constraining productivity growth. Retirement age rises incrementally. Investment in retraining and lifelong learning remains inadequate.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Sanctions lead to a contraction in the domestic aviation sector and may stop high-speed trains from operating.
2024-26: Funds for the renewal of infrastructure remain scarce, leading to a gradual degradation of overall infrastructure quality.
Technological readiness 2022-23: Sanctions delay the rollout of fifth-generation (5G) mobile networks. Restrictions on imports of micro-electronics is a serious constrain on the development of high-tech industry.
2024-26: Research and development spending remains significantly below the OECD average.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
7.2 5.8 40 61 8 14
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
Russia's leadership regards macroeconomic stability as a prerequisite for state security, and we expect a conservative fiscal and monetary policy to remain a high priority through the forecast period. The fiscal deficit will gradually decline to 3.2% of GDP in 2026. External borrowing will remain low and inflation, which has risen sharply as a result of sanctions in 2022, will also fall rapidly back to target over the forecast period.
Oil prices remain the primary risk to the macroeconomic environment Although the macroeconomic environment will remain one of Russia's best-scoring categories, it will underperform as a result of sanctions, which will lead to stagnating growth and overall macroeconomic uncertainty. International sanctions have reduced tax receipts from non-hydrocarbons exports, increasing reliance on revenue from the energy sector. This makes the budget vulnerable to a downturn in global oil prices, particularly as sanctions have already forced Russia to export oil at a discount. Western financial sanctions also mean that Russia cannot easily accumulate large external savings as a way to insulate the economy from future shocks, and also prevent the Russian government from borrowing easily from international investors if required. The conflict in Ukraine is also likely to lead to a sustained increase in military spending, which could weaken the government's commitment to fiscal prudence.
Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
3.3 2.0 74 80 13 16
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
Policy towards private enterprise and competition has always been one of Russia's worst-scoring indicators, and the country slips further in the global ranking in 2022-26 (ranking 80th out of 82 countries). The conflict with the West is likely to accentuate the government's involvement in the economy through complete or partial ownership of companies in key strategic industries (energy, telecommunications, commodity extraction and banking) as well as slow down the privatisation process initiated after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Economic sanctions will further deepen the dependence of firms on state banks and government subsidies. Furthermore, competition will continue to be severely undermined in industries where the playing field favours companies associated with political authorities.

- Like other industrialised countries, Russia responded to the pandemic with fiscal stimulus and measures to support business. The pandemic is likely to have further strengthened the position of the state sector, as public funds will be more readily provided to "systemic" companies in the form of subsidised loans.

There will be little privatisation over the forecast period
- The war in Ukraine is likely to lead to further state intervention in the economy. Directed lending will be used to prevent the failure of major enterprises, and also to manage disruption to supply chains caused by sanctions. The privatisation drive has been patchy in recent years and the war will further undermine political will to privatise any major state-held assets over the forecast period.
- In the event of military setbacks in Ukraine, Russia could formally declare national mobilisation. Russia has already started to mobilise the economy by introducing changes to federal labour law and measures to increase government intervention to direct production. Should Russia formally declare war, we expect the government to further strengthen its grip on the economy.
- The court system is often compromised. In a number of high-profile cases, the state or powerful insiders have used the judiciary to expropriate businesses. The dominant position of the security elite within the system of power means that the abuse of law enforcement and the justice system to seize the assets of competitors will remain a pervasive and growing problem. An improvement in the protection of commercial and property rights over the forecast period is unlikely.
- The government has attempted to offset the economic impact of sanctions by reducing the administrative burden on businesses and announcing a moratorium on a range of regulatory checks. The government will continue to make some progress in removing the technical and administrative barriers to conducting business, including by expanding e-government services and reducing the frequency of cumbersome and time-consuming regulatory checks. Further measures to reduce red tape and inspections are likely to be announced as part of the national economic recovery plan.
- Protection of intellectual property is likely to worsen. Given the confrontation with the West, the Russian government has little incentive to strengthen oversight or enforce copyright protection of companies from what it classifies as "unfriendly states". To offset the impact of Western sanctions, the government has permitted "parallel import" of Western goods without the authorisation of the producer.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
3.3 1.0 77 82 16 16
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
Russia is likely to implement polies that restrict trade freedom Policy towards foreign investment is Russia's worst-scoring category, and the score deteriorates further in the forecast period. Russia is now at the bottom of our global ranking of 82 countries in terms of policy towards foreign investment owing to political interference, inconsistent policy implementation and legal risks. Investors face significant formal barriers to investment posed by sanctions. Russia is likely to implement polies that restrict trade freedom; Russia's import substitution programme, for example, will favour domestic producers to the disadvantage of foreign competitors. We expect the country's stalled transition to a free-market economy to further discourage foreign investment.

- Western sanctions have significantly complicated the operating environment for foreign investors by disrupting cross-border financial transactions and imports. Russia has created a new category of unfriendly states, which includes all the countries that have imposed sanctions on it. Companies associated with these countries will find it more difficult to lobby the government on regulatory issues or secure official support to resolve operational difficulties. Deteriorating relations with the West will expose Western investors to retaliatory measures from government authorities. Geopolitical tensions have made it much more likely that rulings of international investment arbitration bodies are disregarded by Russian courts.
- Russia's integration into the world economy will be significantly lower over the forecast period, although the government remains eager to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) and international investment from outside the West, and particularly to develop new supply chains with Asian companies. In 2019 the government established Special Investment Contracts, providing protection against regulatory or tax changes and giving foreign companies access to state support for the localisation of manufacturing production and state procurement tenders. New incentives to encourage foreign investment are likely to be announced in 2022-24.
- The increased role of the Russian security services in economic policymaking may result in additional restrictions being placed on foreign investment in certain sectors. The "securitisation" of economic policymaking has also had a negative effect on the quality of legislation, which is often adopted quickly, with little stakeholder consultation or consideration of the impact on business. This particularly concerns the information and communications technology (ICT) sector.
- Foreign investment in "strategic" sectors, which includes most investments in hydrocarbons, metals, defence and communications, will continue to be closely controlled by the government, and will be all but impossible for Western investors. Formally, permission from a government commission is required for foreign investors to acquire a stake of more than 25% in strategic industries. In practice, the law on strategic sectors is not expected to be a significant impediment to foreign investment, but obtaining approval is time consuming. The significance of formal rules on FDI, as on other matters, has waned. Obtaining the personal endorsement of local or sectoral actors, as well as that of the president, is of greater relevance. Foreign investment in any Russian blue-chip company requires high-level formal and informal support, and is most likely to be successful if mediated in a joint venture with development institutions such as VEB.RF, a state development bank, or the Russian Direct Investment Fund.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.9 4.2 55 79 12 16
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
Russia's trade will be severely disrupted by Western sanctions Along with policy towards foreign investment, the foreign trade and exchange controls category records the biggest decline in the forecast period. Russia's position in the global ranking falls from 55th to 79th, and it is now second from bottom in the regional ranking. Western sanctions imposed following Russia's invasion of Ukraine have severely disrupted foreign trade and created shortages of certain goods. We expect trade with the EU to reach historical lows in our forecast period, whereas financial and trade relations with the rest of the world will grow significantly. However, major companies and financial institutions from third countries are likely to take a cautious approach to trading with Russia owing to concerns of falling under secondary sanctions. Logistical challenges will increase owing to the withdrawal of leading cargo operators from the Russian market, the closure of Russian airspace for Western airlines and EU, UK and US ban on the insurance of Russian vessels.

- Sanctions will create major logistical bottlenecks. This will be caused by a direct ban by many countries on Russian vehicles, aircraft and shipping entering their countries. Reorienting to new markets will take time as Russia will have to create new infrastructure and establish new trading and financial intermediaries to handle foreign trade.
- Almost all of Russia's major banks, including the Central Bank of Russia (CBR), are under Western sanctions. These will make it difficult for all companies to transfer capital across borders. Russia will increase the share of trade conducted in other currencies and develop special-purpose vehicles to facilitate large-scale foreign investment (for example in the energy sector). However, conducting cross-border financial transactions outside the US dollar system and the SWIFT international payments network will be cumbersome and expensive, and many non-Western banks and companies will be reluctant to undertake it.
- Sanctions will severely restrict the import of a wide range of Western goods and will result in a radical reorientation of Russia's foreign trade, with Asian countries, above all China, accounting for an increasing share of total trade. Kazakhstan will also become an important channel for the parallel import of goods produced in the West, often without the permission of the producer.
- Russia will continue to promote regional trade integration within the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU). It will actively seek new free-trade agreements (FTAs) between the bloc and third countries. Negotiations over an FTA between China and the EEU are unlikely to be concluded by 2026. The effective operation of the EEU as a single market has been partly undermined by Russia's sanctions and counter-sanctions with the West, but work to harmonise regulations across the bloc will continue.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.3 4.9 62 77 14 15
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
Tax rates will remain competitive but changes to the tax code are likely Taxes is one of Russia's better performing categories and registers only a modest decline in the score in 2022-26 compared with the historical period (to 4.9 from 5.3). The time it takes to pay taxes is now comparable with that in advanced OECD countries. Tax rates are largely competitive and tax administration has improved as a result of a concerted digitisation programme. There have been regular amendments to the tax code, and this trend is likely to continue and even intensify over the forecast period as government will have to respond to a major restructuring of the economy caused by Western sanctions. Enforcement of tax regulation remains uneven, and allegations of tax evasion are often used as a pretext for the seizure of business assets by competitors in collusion with law enforcement and tax authorities. In November 2020 Russia replaced its long-standing flat-rate tax system with a two-tier system, with a basic rate of 13% and an upper rate of 15% on incomes over Rb5m (US$85,722, at current exchange rates). Following a 2-percentage point rise in 2019, the standard value-added tax (VAT) rate is now 20%, slightly higher than the unweighted OECD average of 19.3%. Employers also pay a 30% social insurance premium into a non-budgetary fund that significantly raises the effective rate of personal tax. In April 2020 the government cut this rate to 15% for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). The standard rate of corporation tax is 20%, which is low by international standards. The tax system for the oil sector is gradually shifting to taxing at source, rather than on exports.
The budget has become more reliant on energy export receipts
- The fiscal position of the government has been weakened by sanctions, which have severely restricted the government's capacity to borrow on international money markets. At the same time, dependence on revenue from the oil and gas sector has increased. The fall in imports has depressed revenue from excise duties and VAT, while the share of oil and gas in total tax revenue has increased to above 60%, from under 40% prior to the start of the war. Given these constraints, the government is unlikely to undertake major cuts in taxation, such as a reduction in VAT or income tax. It will instead focus on targeted tax relief in individual sectors. Surveys suggest that there is public support for a more progressive system of taxation. With Russia having made the symbolic move to abandon the flat-rate system, there is a risk that the higher rate will be raised in 2022-26 or that other forms of income tax on higher earners will be introduced.
- In the first half of the forecast period the government will use the tax system to offset the impact of sanctions and support growth. As during the coronavirus pandemic, companies will be allowed to defer social-insurance-premium payments. IT companies will not be subject to corporation tax until 2025 and companies providing hotel accommodation will not be subject to VAT for five years. Income tax on interest on deposits has been cancelled for two years to help stabilise the banking system. The Ministry of Finance may reduce taxes on a range of domestic financial products to encourage investment.
- Taxes on the extractive sector are likely to remain high. The government has a tendency to impose unexpected windfall taxes on the extractive industry, and this is likely to have been consolidated by the weakening of the tax base caused by sanctions. The government plans to reduce export taxes on oil and oil products to zero by 2024, while increasing the mineral extraction tax. The government estimates that this will increase the tax burden on the oil sector by Rb220bn-270bn (US$3.8bn-4.8bn) a year. The government is likely to make further changes to the tax regime in response to movements in oil prices and industry lobbying. New preferential agreements for mature fields are likely to be made available.
- As a result of sanctions, the finance ministry has reduced the amount of budget data that it publishes. Oversight of the government's fiscal position and outlook is likely to deteriorate. At the same time, capital controls and the disruption to trade and economic activity caused by sanctions will lead to a rise in the size of the informal sector. This runs the risk of increasing tax evasion and fraud, reversing the positive trend of increased tax collection.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.8 3.3 65 75 12 15
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
All borrowers will continue to encounter restricted access to external financing Russia's score in the financing category records a small decline over the forecast period but remains one of the worst-performing categories. The West has imposed sanctions on almost all major Russian financial institutions, including the central bank. These sanctions have excluded Russian companies from global capital and debt markets. In late June 2022 Russia defaulted on some of its sovereign foreign debt as it was not able to make an interest payment to bond holders because of sanctions. The transparency of the sector will decline over the forecast period as the CBR has reduced public reporting requirements to try to protect financial institutions from sanctions.

- No Russian companies will be able to access global financial markets over the forecast period. Some major commodity producers may secure bilateral loans from non-Western banks or companies for major investment projects. This will push up the cost of bank borrowing for all companies and individuals. Small and medium-sized companies have tended to rely on retained earnings for a large share of investment and so are likely to be less affected by the tighter financing conditions.
- Even before Western sanctions were first imposed in 2014, the cost of financing for business was significantly higher in Russia than in other emerging markets. If sanctions are eased or lifted (not our core scenario), there will be a high political risk premium on loans to Russian banks and it is unlikely that international banks will return to the Russian market quickly.
- The stock of foreign public and private debt will steadily decline over the forecast period. The authorities are likely to proceed on the basis that the country will be excluded from the global financial system for an extended period. It will seek to develop and deepen rouble-denominated capital markets from a low base. The government will seek to establish new mechanisms for conducting trade and financial transactions with non-Western partners outside the US dollar system. But efforts to develop an alternative financial infrastructure to facilitate trade and investment will be hampered by the small size of the Russian market, the volatility of the rouble, and concerns among foreign banks that they could be subject to secondary sanctions.
- There is a risk that improvements in financial regulation over the past seven years may be reversed. In response to Western sanctions, the CBR has eased reporting requirements for banks. As a result, the quality and availability of data on the banking sector has declined significantly. In this opaque operating environment, there is a high risk that oversight of the banking sector may deteriorate, raising the risk of future banking crises.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.6 5.9 27 57 5 14
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
Russia benefits from a low-cost, well-educated workforce The labour market will remain one of Russia's better-scoring categories. The score declines to 5.9 in the forecast period from 6.6, and Russia's position slips in the global and regional rankings. Advantages include the low cost of labour combined with high levels of education (although senior-level Russian talent is expensive). Despite the muted demand outlook, labour shortages are likely to be a constraint in some sectors, particularly in high-skilled areas. Employment protection for permanent employees in Russia is currently above the OECD average, and official statistics suggest that the use of temporary contracts is low in an international comparison. The labour market has historically tended to adjust to demand shocks through reducing wage levels and hours worked rather than the overall employment level, and it is likely to respond again during the downturn caused by sanctions. A long-delayed rise in the pension age is now being implemented, but resources to enable older workers to retrain and continue employment are inadequate.

- The economic disruption as a result of Western sanctions will lead to a rise in the unemployment rate in the first part of the forecast period. The official unemployment rate may rise to almost 5% in 2022-26. However, this figure will not capture widespread underemployment, which is likely to be higher in regions with large manufacturing sectors. There is likely to be a shift in employment away from large industrial employers towards services and SMEs. As in previous economic crises, many companies are likely to respond to the downturn by hoarding labour-reducing hours while trying to avoid formal payroll cuts. This will act as a break on the pace of the restructuring of the economy.
- There is evidence that the war in Ukraine has led to a rise in emigration of high-skilled workers from major conurbations. Some sectors, notably IT, may be disproportionally affected. However, there is no reliable data on the level of emigration. According to data published by the Russian Association for Electronic Communications, 50,000-70,000 IT professionals have fled the country. We expect demand for foreign labour to decline in Russia amid fears of rising unemployment among the domestic workforce. In the coming years the retirement age will rise incrementally, to 65 for men and 60 for women, providing a boost to the working-age population. Nevertheless, the labour force aged 15-64 will fall by 0.6% per year on average over the forecast period.
- Western sanctions will lead to a sharp reduction in international academic and scientific exchange. Research institutes will find it difficult to access cutting-edge equipment. The militarisation of Russian society has also led to a rise in censorship and state control of academic institutions. All these factors are likely to lead to a gradual decline in the quality of secondary and tertiary education in Russia, although the effects of this will be limited in the forecast period.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.5 5.0 62 67 15 15
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
A modest improvement in the score and ranking for this category is expected in the forecast period, as the government has made investment in roads (an area of persistent weakness, partly owing to extreme weather conditions) a priority. Daily and mobile internet usage exceeds that of other BRICS countries (Brazil, India, China and South Africa), although it is below the OECD average. A focus on major, politically important construction projects has diverted funds from small, but more effective, projects. Despite some progress, Western sanctions will lead to a general technical regression and a decline in quality in many domains.

- Sanctions will affect the quality and availability of air transportation. The size of Russia's civilian air fleet will steadily decline over the forecast period. Western sanctions have led to the withdrawal of Airbus and Boeing; the European and US firms account for around three-quarters of Russia's air passenger fleet. Without access to spare parts and servicing, the authorities will be forced to ground a significant proportion of the planes so that they can be cannibalised for parts. The serial production of domestically produced alternatives using Russian built engines, the MS-21 and SSJ-100, will not begin until the final years of the forecast period. In the government's baseline scenario, where it succeeds in establishing channels for the import of parts, a third of the fleet will be grounded in the near to medium term. In the pessimistic scenario, two-thirds of the fleet will be grounded. The risk of major air disasters will increase.
- Given the pressure on the civilian aviation network, rail infrastructure will grow in importance. Western sanctions will mean that high-speeds trains produced by companies such as Siemens may be taken out of service in the early part of the forecast period. The government is likely to respond to the reorienting of trade away from Europe by investing in new transportation infrastructure to expand linkages with Asian partners.

Infrastructure links with China will grow, albeit with limitations
- Western sanctions will prevent the renewal and modernisation of key communication infrastructure. The rollout of 5G technology will be hampered by sanctions, which have led to the withdrawal of Western telecoms companies such as Nokia (Finland) and Ericsson (Sweden), two major equipment players in Russia. The Russian government will seek new partnerships with non-Western firms such as Huawei of China. The government's desire to maintain technological sovereignty in sensitive areas will pose some limitations to joint ventures with Chinese firms. Nevertheless, Russian companies are unlikely to produce the semiconductors needed to power advanced telecoms equipment.
- Transport infrastructure for the Northern Sea Route through the Arctic Ocean will be a major focus of investment in the forecast period. Following the construction of the Power of Siberia gas pipeline, linking gasfields in eastern Siberia to China, a second gas pipeline to China from western Siberia (the Altai pipeline) has now been agreed.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
7.5 7.2 27 38 3 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
Technological readiness is Russia's best-scoring category. Internet usage and mobile-phone penetration are high, and e-commerce has grown rapidly in recent years, despite declining real incomes. Internet regulation will remain stringent, potentially hampering innovation. Spending on research and development (R&D) is low as a share of GDP, and Russia accounts for just 0.23% of international patents (despite accounting for over 2% of world GDP at purchasing power parity). The government is eager to harness new technology to raise productivity and trend growth, but previous efforts to foster the development of high-tech sectors will have success.
Investment levels are low
- Restrictions on supplies of processors, chips and semiconductors as a result of sanctions-in particular restrictions on supplies from Taiwan-will have a serious impact on Russia's capacity to produce electronic goods and develop cutting-edge technology. Relocating production of processors to Russia will take at least a year to complete. It will also result in a sharp decline in volume and quality of output and a significant rise in costs. The technical capability of Russian chip manufacturers is around 20 years behind cutting-edge Taiwanese companies.
- Spending on R&D is just 1% of GDP, and investment levels remain low, at about 20% of GDP. Increased military spending means that government spending on education is unlikely to rise as a share of GDP over the forecast period, and the quality of research is likely to decline. Commercial R&D investment is pro-cyclical and is likely to decline sharply in the first part of the forecast period as a result of the sharp drop in output, before recovering modestly towards the end of the forecast period. Overall levels of R&D spending will remain below the OECD average (2.4% of GDP).
- The sharp fall in household consumption and restrictions on imports will lead to a contraction in e-commerce in the first half of the forecast period, although it may continue to increase its share of total retail sales. In the medium-term significant growth potential remains. E-commerce accounts for 6-7% of total retail, compared with 10-15% in OECD countries. The coronavirus pandemic is likely to have accelerated the shift to e-commerce and online retail, with Russian firms dominating so far.
- Development of Russia's ICT and software industries will be inhibited by the increasingly restrictive political environment. The government is preoccupied by information security and in recent years has adopted laws requiring the localisation of data storage and enhanced capacity to monitor and block websites. These laws will raise costs for ICT companies, reducing funds available for research and investment.

Economic forecast: Policy trends Economic policy will be devoted to propping up the economy, but the tools to do so have become greatly constrained as a result of sanctions, with, in effect, the freezing of about half of the US$643bn in assets (at the time) of the Central Bank of Russia (CBR). The government's largest fiscal initiative is the suspension of employers' social security contributions until May 2023, which will help to control unemployment by incentivising employers to retain employees. This means that a serious spike in unemployment will probably be avoided, but incomes will take a severe hit.
The authorities are mobilising the economy for a long war in Ukraine. On July 6th parliament passed two bills, which will require businesses to fulfil state defence contracts (for example by redirecting production towards military needs) and give the authorities the right to force employees to do compulsory overtime. The bills (the first of their kind) will provide the authorities with more powers to make decisions on special measures in the economic sphere, with a view to supporting the defence industry.
The unfolding economic and financial crises in Russia will lead to a greater dominance of the state over the economy. As large banks and companies struggle to offset pressure, the government could buy companies' shares to compensate, with limited effect, for the outflow of foreign investors. For as long as sanctions remain in place, Russia's business environment will be incredibly unfavourable. The government could also nationalise companies in key sectors to minimise loss of employment.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Government expenditure 19.0 24.6 21.0 21.3 20.4 20.5
Government revenue 19.4 20.8 16.2 17.5 17.1 17.3
Budget balance 0.4 -3.8 -4.8 -3.9 -3.3 -3.2
Government debt 15.6 20.7 24.6 27.6 30.3 33.2
As a result of the war in Ukraine and the subsequent sanctions, EIU expects the budget balance to fall into a wide deficit. Energy export revenue, which usually props up the budget, is expected to contract and will now be spent on financing Russia's military offensive in Ukraine and supporting the economy to prevent a total collapse. A prolonged military conflict, combined with the impact of sanctions, will be costly for the state budget and will limit spending in all other areas, including social spending. The government may increase spending on the administration to maintain the loyalty of public servants and law-enforcement officials.
The government could increase some taxes in order to finance its operations, such as excise duties and corporate tax, as well as taxes on property and deposits. With Russia's banking sector at risk, it will become harder for the government to finance its deficit and raise even domestic debt, which, although low by international standards, will rise as a share of GDP this year. In the medium term, the government will struggle with its public finances. We expect to see a consistently wider deficit in 2023-26 than in the previous decade.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Central bank refinancing rate (av; %) 6.0 10.5 6.3 7.2 4.8 3.9
Lending rate (av; %) 7.2 10.1 7.0 6.6 5.0 5.0
Deposit rate (av; %) 3.8 7.8 4.8 3.5 3.5 3.5
The main policy priority of the CBR is propping up the economy with the few tools left at its disposal, after about half of its reserve assets were frozen under international sanctions. In the aftermath of the invasion, the CBR imposed strict capital controls to prevent a complete sell-off of the rouble. However, these have now been softened, with Russia easing a requirement for export companies to exchange 80% of their foreign revenue into roubles and setting a new limit at 50%. On June 10th the CBR cut its key interest rate by 150 percentage points, to the pre-war level of 9.5%, in an attempt to revive lending following an increase in its main policy rate to 20% on February 28th. This marked the fourth consecutive rate cut since April. Previously, the CBR had already reduced the rate by 900 percentage points, to 11%, as the rouble returned to pre-crisis levels. We expect the CBR to keep the rate at 9.5% until year-end and resume gradual easing in 2023-24.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Economic growth (%)
US GDP 5.7 2.3 1.3 1.4 1.9 2.0
Euro area GDP 5.4 2.2 1.6 1.9 1.8 1.8
EU27 GDP 5.4 2.4 1.8 2.1 2.0 1.9
World GDP 5.7 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.6
World trade 10.9 4.3 4.2 3.8 3.6 3.6
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 4.7 7.7 3.7 1.6 2.1 2.1
Euro area CPI 2.5 6.8 2.9 1.9 1.8 1.8
EU27 CPI 2.8 7.2 3.3 2.1 2.0 1.9
Manufactures (measured in US$) 5.8 2.8 2.2 3.2 2.4 1.6
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 70.4 107.9 95.5 86.5 78.0 69.0
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 37.9 23.7 -6.1 -7.6 -4.2 -3.4
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.1 1.5 3.2 2.8 2.7 2.7
€ 3-month rate -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
US$:€ (av) 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
Rb:US$ (av) 73.65 75.27 82.67 88.62 90.75 93.06
Rb:€ (av) 87.2 82.7 94.4 105.9 111.6 115.9
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP 4.7 -10.0 -2.6 1.6 1.8 1.4
Private consumption 9.5 -13.1 -1.8 2.1 1.7 1.9
Government consumption 1.5 3.0 2.0 1.3 1.4 1.5
Gross fixed investment 6.6 -18.0 1.0 2.0 2.3 2.2
Exports of goods & services 3.4 -11.9 -4.9 3.3 3.7 3.6
Imports of goods & services 16.3 -24.0 6.0 4.8 3.9 5.8
Domestic demand 7.8 -12.7 -0.1 1.9 1.8 1.9
Agriculture -1.3 -9.4 -2.8 1.6 2.3 1.4
Industry 4.9 -10.3 -2.6 1.6 1.7 1.5
Services 5.0 -10.3 -2.6 1.6 1.7 1.3
We forecast that Russia will experience a deep recession in 2022 as a result of the war with Ukraine and international sanctions. The economy has so far shown resilience to sanctions, supported by the large domestic market and production. Nevertheless, the shock to the economy will result in a sizeable contraction in real GDP this year, which we forecast at 10%.
Russia will suffer from a shortage in the supply of components as stocks are depleted against the backdrop of reduced imports. Gross fixed investment will take a significant hit as industries face supply shortages. Low external demand for some Russian goods, as well as component scarcity, will lead to some industries grinding to a halt, before alternatives are secured. This will cause earnings to fall and, as inflation remains elevated throughout the year, we expect private consumption to be severely reduced.
Net exports, which usually contribute significantly to headline growth, are also subject to major downside risks. As well as an inevitable significant contraction in imports, we forecast that exports will also be adversely affected. Exporting from Russia will become more difficult and costly as a result of financial and physical restrictions, and global demand for Russian goods will fall.
In 2023 we forecast that the economy will contract further before returning to positive growth in 2024. Russia will adjust to life under sanctions, and relative macroeconomic stability will be restored, but the economy will be set on a low-growth trend as sanctions remain in place and new investment remains constrained. Russia will face a bigger impact from the oil embargo by 2023 as oil prices decline, and export revenue will be less likely to offset loss of the EU market. Significant infrastructure investment will be required to redirect Russian gas away from Europe, but this is unlikely to materialise in 2022-26.
Russia's demographic outlook has been negative for some years now, with the coronavirus pandemic further worsening demographic trends. The economic shocks of the 1990s led to a significant rise in excess mortality in Russia, and there is a risk that this could happen again during the current crisis. This will make Russia's growth prospects dire over the next 30 years.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends Growth in agriculture fluctuates considerably, owing to variable weather conditions, but averaged about 1.6% annually in 2011-21. Basic restructuring, debt resolution and some agricultural land reforms are gradually turning around a sector that has traditionally been regarded as Russia's most inefficient. Farmers are legally entitled to buy and sell land and to use it as collateral. However, local authorities remain reluctant to initiate land privatisation.
Agriculture will likely to benefit from greater government investment The sector will receive particular attention from the state over the medium term as Russia battles sweeping Western sanctions. The government will prioritise domestic food stability and low prices amid sharply reduced imports. Furthermore, Russia will aim to boost its agricultural export capability to compensate for losses of other commodity exports. So far, sanctions have largely been limited to Russia's financial and industrial sectors. Given the risk of a global food crisis as a result of the war in Ukraine, US and EU sanctions on Russian agricultural products seem unlikely. The government is likely to tighten the import ban on a wide range of Western food products, which has been in place since 2014, giving domestic producers incentives for expansion.
Although state aid to the sector has increased, lower competition could constrain efficiency gains, particularly as foreign investment remains subdued. Moreover, import substitution has no clear record of success historically, often because of local production inefficiencies. To date, the sums earmarked by the government for support to agriculture have been too small to have much of an impact on a sector that still accounted for 5.6% of total employment in 2020.
Manufacturing output plunged by almost 15% during the recession of 2009 and since then it has registered modest growth of 3% on average in 2011-21. Russia has a large manufacturing sector supported by its big domestic market. However, much of this is not internationally competitive and relies on state orders or state support in the form of soft budget constraints.
The latest sanctions are likely to have a severe impact on Russia's manufacturing sector. The shortage of technological components will lead to a sharp downturn in output as some factories either have to delay or temporarily suspend production, or revert to older and less sophisticated production methods. Despite the large size of Russia's manufacturing sector, it does not boast robust high value-added production. Hence Russia would be unable to produce the necessary components on the scale it needs, and sourcing them in sufficient quantities from non-sanctioning countries will also prove difficult. We expect manufacturing to contract by 13% in 2022 and then post average growth of just 0.5% in 2023-26.
Services will recover only slowly, as household spending will remain weak After strong growth in the years leading up the 2008-09 global financial crisis, services have averaged a modest 1.6% growth per year since then. During the 2014-16 recession, personal disposable incomes in US dollar terms plummeted. In 2022 we estimate that they would be about 27% of their 2013 peak. We do not expect personal disposable incomes to recover to 2013 levels until well beyond our medium-term forecast period.
We forecast that services, after falling by an estimated 10.3% in 2022 and a further 2.6% in 2023, will recover slowly largely in line with the overall growth in the economy. International sanctions will limit the expansion of financial services, which cannot raise debt on US and EU capital markets, and significantly reduce funding for investment in other areas. Proposals to involve the private sector more actively in the provision of social services are at an early stage, but are potentially a significant growth area. The ageing of the population opens up the potential for greater demand for health, insurance and related services, but lower than previously expected incomes may not provide sufficient incentive for prospective suppliers.
Economic forecast: Oil and gas   2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Crude oil production ('000 b/d) 10,985 10,977 11,162 11,257 10,270 10,500
 % change 2.6 -0.1 1.7 0.9 8.7 2.4
Natural gas production (bn cu metres) 639 691 727 740 694 765
 % change 0.8 8.3 5.1 1.8 -6.2 -10.2
The extractive sector typically accounts for over 12% of gross value added and over 60% of exports. Following a slump in oil production and exports as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, the sector made a partial recovery in 2021, benefiting from accelerating external demand and higher prices in the second half of the year. In 2022-23 the sector will be hampered by international sanctions and an EU, US and UK embargo on Russian oil. Russia has so far not been able to fully reap the benefits of higher prices, as the high risk associated with its oil has forced it to sell it at large discounts. Furthermore, Russia will not be able to fully compensate for the loss of the European market for its oil with buyers in Asia. As a result we expect oil production to contract in 2022-23 with output remaining below pre-pandemic levels by 2026.
Despite the negative outlook, oil will remain central for the Russian economy, and sustaining production and securing foreign buyers will be a key government priority. We do not expect the downturn in output to deter new developments in Eastern Siberia and the Far North, in particular the vast Vostok oilfield, which is being developed by Rosneft, Russia's leading oil company. However, the cost of development of new reserves in the Arctic is significantly higher than at mature fields, while sanctions, a ban on the sale of Western high-tech equipment and know-how, as well as uncertainty over future global demand will push up the cost of financing. The government's Energy Strategy to 2035, published in mid-2020, projected that oil production in 2024 would be between 555m and 560m tonnes, unchanged or slightly below the 2019 peak. We forecast that production will hover around 500m tonnes. Even if Russian oil producers are able to reverse all of the cuts made in 2020-23, which appears doubtful, production in the longer term looks likely to plateau at best, or else enter a long period of gradual decline.
Russia has the largest proven gas reserves in the world, and annual production in the gas sector has increased by over 15% since 2014. Russia remains the world's top net natural-gas exporter, supplying about a third of its output overseas. In 2021 Russia exported US$55.5bn worth of natural gas-the highest since 2013. This was aided by the economic rebound in Europe following the pandemic and a spike in natural gas prices as a result.
We expect natural gas production to decline in 2022-23. The EU has not imposed an embargo on Russian natural gas, and is unlikely to do so in the immediate term, owing to the important role of Russian gas for European industries and lack of viable alternatives. However, Russia has been gradually decreasing its supply to the EU, with direct gas flows suspended to a number of EU member states. A complete cut-off of Russian gas is a very high risk.
The US has applied sanctions on Gazprom, a majority state-owned energy firm, restricting its access to financing and the transfer of technology for deep-water, offshore and shale exploration. It also applied sanctions that constrain the ability of Western companies to work with Russian energy companies. In the event of a complete cut-off of Russian gas towards Europe, the EU could impose sanctions on the Russian energy sector-for example by excluding Gazprombank from SWIFT. We expect sanctions to remain in place throughout the forecast period, severely constraining the ability of the company to develop its operations further.
We do not expect an EU embargo on natural gas, but flows will decline The war in Ukraine has accelerated the EU's rush towards renewables and has led to an EU-wide pledge to phase out the use of Russian energy by 2030. A significant reduction in the hydrocarbons volumes imported from Russia is likely to occur well before that. Once Russia and the EU end their natural gas trade relations, these are unlikely to be reinstated again. The EU absorbs about two-thirds of Russian natural gas exports, with nearly all of it delivered via pipeline. Russia will not be unable to divert deliveries away from Europe towards Asia, as it lacks the pipeline infrastructure. Constructing it on such a scale will require significant time and financial resources.
Russia will have few options to support its natural gas sector over the medium term and is therefore likely to boost liquefied natural gas (LNG) investment. That way it will avoid the logistical constraints of diverting exports away from Europe and will be able to fill supply gaps in the global energy market as large LNG producers re-direct some of their exports towards Europe. On June 30th 2022 Mr Putin signed a decree on the state takeover of the Sakhalin-2 project in the Russian Far East, forcing out foreign investors such as the Shell (UK) and Mitsui and Mitsubishi (Japanese). The Sakhalin-2 project hosts Russia's first LNG plant, with a production capacity of 9.6m tonnes/year (t/y), with potential for expansion to 15m t/y. The state takeover signals that the government may plan to expand capacity at Sakhalin-2 without foreign involvement.
Most of the country's LNG comes from the Yamal project in which Novatek is the majority operator. Novatek runs three existing LNG trains with a combined production capacity of 16.5m t/y. This is Russia's second LNG plant after Sakhalin-2. Novatek retains a 60% stake in the 19.8m-t/y Arctic LNG 2 project, near the Yamal project, which is scheduled to come online in 2023-26. In January 2019 a 2.7m-t/y floating storage and regasification unit-Russia's first-was launched off the Kaliningrad Oblast coast. The 21.6m-t/y Utrenny LNG terminal, which will be built as part of Novatek's Arctic LNG 2 project, is scheduled to be completed by 2022.
Russia supplies gas to Turkey-one of its largest buyers-via the TurkStream pipeline, which can transfer 31.5bn cu metres/year of natural gas from Russia to Turkey via the Black Sea. Half of the twin pipeline's supply is intended for the Turkish market, which began receiving gas shipments in January 2020. Until 2022 the other half was distributed towards south-eastern Europe, Hungary and Austria. We do not expect Russia's natural gas exports to Turkey to come under threat, as Turkey is extremely reliant on Russian energy and has been careful not to impose sanctions on Russia or antagonise it in other ways. Russia also supplies gas to Turkey via the 16bn cu metre/y Blue Stream pipeline.
In December 2019 Gazprom started delivering natural gas to China via the Power of Siberia pipeline, which could supply up to 38bn cu metres/y of gas from fields in eastern Siberia if fully contracted capacity is reached by 2025. It is evaluating plans for an additional gas pipeline-known as Power of Siberia 2 or Altai-that could supply up to 50bn cu metres/y via Mongolia to China. The North-South gas pipeline project with Pakistan is under government consideration as well.
LNG is becoming an increasingly important part of Russia's gas sector After a focus on acquiring downstream assets abroad, even as its main west Siberian gasfields were maturing, Gazprom is again turning its attention to developing new gasfields, notably the Yamal megaproject. Three gas-production facilities that have a total annual capacity of 115bn cu metres have been set up at Bovanenkovskoye, the biggest Yamal field, where 52 wells were commissioned in 2020. However, the latest sanctions and lack of foreign investment are likely to delay the development of these fields.
Crude oil represents a major commodity export After booming in the early years of the century, production of crude oil has slowed sharply in recent years, as easy gains have been achieved and high marginal taxes weigh on investment. In an effort to incentivise investment while maintaining public revenue from the sector, the government is gradually lowering export duties on oil and oil products to zero by 2024, whereas the mineral extraction tax will correspondingly rise. The latest sanctions and the expected fall in output could prompt the government to revise strategy. Supporting the extractive sector will be a central priority, but it may become increasingly difficult to do so over the medium to long term, as we project that oil prices will decline.
EU and US energy sanctions are likely to remain in place in 2022-26 and beyond The US and the EU have placed sanctions on Rosneft and Gazprom Neft, an oil-producing subsidiary of Gazprom. The US has also sanctioned Lukoil and Surgutneftegaz (both energy companies), despite the fact that they are nominally privately controlled. EU and US sanctions are likely to remain in place throughout the forecast period, impairing the country's oil production potential, and are very likely to be extended. Investment and output growth are likely to be curtailed in 2022-26 and beyond. Maintaining and expanding production often requires foreign expertise and financing to maximise output from mature wells and develop new fields, most of which are technically challenging.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Consumer prices (av) 6.7 21.2 12.1 6.4 5.1 4.0
Consumer prices (year-end) 8.3 23.6 9.1 5.7 4.5 4.0
Average wages 10.8 12.0 5.0 7.3 7.0 7.5
Real wages 3.8 -7.6 -6.3 0.8 1.8 3.4
Unit labour costs 5.2 17.3 -0.7 -1.0 3.2 3.9
Labour costs per hour (US$) 4.26 4.67 4.47 4.47 4.67 4.90
We expect inflation to spike in 2022. The main driver of price growth will be forced import suppression, which will lead to shortages of manufactured products for consumption and components needed to manufacture goods for the domestic market. Another factor fuelling inflationary pressures will be logistical constraints, which will make importing even harder. Sanctions have made it physically difficult and financially costly to deliver goods to Russia. Looser monetary policy and a slightly weaker currency in the second half of the year will put further pressure on prices. Inflation is at risk of increasing above 20% this year. In the medium term, inflation will moderate as domestic demand remains depressed and the economy adapts to sanctions.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Exchange rate Rb:US$ (av) 73.65 75.27 82.67 88.62 90.75 93.06
Exchange rate Rb:US$ (end-period) 74.29 76.30 84.57 90.51 91.43 93.29
Exchange rate Rb:€ (av) 87.17 82.66 94.45 105.90 111.62 115.86
Real effective exchange-rate index (2010=100; av) 78.9 92.5 89.9 84.2 82.5 80.9
Purchasing power parity Rb:US$ (av) 27.33 31.66 34.34 35.36 35.92 36.24
Amid the invasion of Ukraine, the rouble lost about 70% of its value between February 23rd and March 9th. The CBR imposed tight capital controls on the inflow and outflow of foreign currency to prop up the rouble, as a result of which the currency appreciated to pre-war levels. The convertibility of the currency remains heavily limited inside Russia, which has also contributed to its relative stability. As the exchange rate stabilised, the CBR gradually started to lift capital controls in May. The conversion of European payments for gas into roubles, as well as strong import suppression, will help prop up the currency. We expect the rouble to average Rb73.4:US$1 in 2022.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Current-account balance 122.0 192.8 147.6 122.5 131.4 127.8
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 6.9 10.1 7.7 6.5 6.7 6.4
Goods: exports fob 493.8 464.1 430.8 408.6 420.2 413.9
Goods: imports fob -304.0 -193.8 -182.7 -183.2 -187.4 -196.5
Trade balance 189.8 270.4 248.1 225.4 232.8 217.4
Services: credit 56.0 55.9 53.0 58.4 61.4 63.9
Services: debit -75.5 -68.5 -78.5 -81.3 -85.6 -89.5
Services balance -19.5 -12.7 -25.5 -22.9 -24.2 -25.6
Primary income: credit 81.1 30.9 29.4 27.6 32.1 34.1
Primary income: debit -124.4 -90.2 -98.6 -101.9 -103.3 -92.1
Primary income balance -43.3 -59.4 -69.2 -74.3 -71.3 -58.1
Secondary income: credit 14.3 15.3 15.0 14.9 15.4 15.7
Secondary income: debit -19.3 -20.8 -20.8 -20.6 -21.3 -21.7
Secondary income balance -5.0 -5.6 -5.8 -5.7 -5.9 -6.0
We expect the current-account surplus to widen. While Russia is set to experience a series of headwinds when it comes to its exports, two main factors will ensure that the current account registers a wide surplus-continuing energy sales to Europe at high prices and heavy import suppression. Although Russia will lose some of its sales to Europe in terms of volume, the tightness of the global energy market will ensure that export receipts remain high, even at heavy discounts. Over the medium term, however, Russia's external balance sheet will come under greater pressure as the EU moves towards a complete phase-out of Russian hydrocarbons and global energy prices decline. Russia is also facing a number of logistical constraints that are likely to hinder its trade, particularly of non-hydrocarbon goods. As a result of restrictions on international financial operations with Russia, the primary and secondary income balances are also likely to take a hit. The wide-ranging sanctions will limit Russia's ability to seek alternative markets for its exports.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Russia Stocks and flows According to balance-of-payments data from the Central Bank of Russia (CBR), annual inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) averaged less than 1% of GDP in 1994-2002. Over the following six years inflows picked up strongly and hit an all-time high of US$75bn in 2008 (equal to 4.2% of GDP), second only to China among emerging markets that year. Inflows halved in 2009-a result of the global financial crisis-before recovering steadily over the next four years. Although not matching the highs before the crisis, annual inflows in 2010-13 were still respectable, averaging 2.7% of GDP. However, since 2014 a sharp rise in political risk linked to the Ukraine conflict and the imposition of international financial sanctions have limited FDI inflows, which averaged just 1.4% of GDP in 2014-21. Strong figures in 2016 followed the sale of a 19.5% stake in Rosneft, a state-owned oil company. In proportional terms, Russia has attracted much less FDI than most transition economies in eastern Europe. In 2021 the stock of FDI-at US$609bn-regained some ground and stood about 8% higher than its 2013 level. Following the 2022 invasion of Ukraine, the imposition of stringent Western sanctions and a strong divestment drive among Western investors, EIU expects FDI inflows to plummet and to average just 0.4% of GDP in 2022-26.
Origin and distribution According to the CBR, a little over a third of the total stock of inward FDI is accounted for by Cyprus-based investors (largely from Russian-owned companies registered offshore). Although EU countries dominate Russian foreign trade, EU investors (other than from Cyprus) account for only about a quarter of inward FDI stock-and some of that total, as is the case in the Netherlands, is probably also dominated by returning Russian capital flight. Inward FDI is highly concentrated, both sectorally and geographically. Slightly less than 15% of the inward FDI stock is in mining, with about one-fifth each in the retail sector and manufacturing. Before 2014 there was a surge of investment into various sectors, including pharmaceuticals and automotives. Flagship companies-such as AvtoVAZ, a carmaker that makes the Lada, and Rosneft-have been allowed to sell stakes to foreign multinationals. However, with the protracted geopolitical stand-off between Russia and the West over Russia's invasion of Ukraine, major foreign firms have reduced exposure to the Russian markets and many companies have pulled out since February 2022. For example, a French automaker, Renault, sold its stake in AvtoVAZ in May 2022 and dozens of other Western companies in the retail, industrial, manufacturing and services sectors have either temporarily or permanently suspended their operations in the country. Divestment will be slow, but we expect a large share of flagship foreign companies to sell their stakes in Russia in order to avoid reputational and sanctions-related risk.
Determinants In the years running up to the financial crisis of 2008-09, the attractions of natural resources, high returns on investment and a fast-growing market helped to counteract investor concerns about the security of property rights, corruption and the absence of a level playing field. These same factors helped to fuel a recovery in FDI inflows in 2010-13. The comparative attractiveness of Russian regions depends more on the regional authorities' will than on more challenging factors, such as geography, the existence of a skilled workforce or impressive infrastructure. In 2022-26 the main determinants of FDI will be perceptions of political risk, international sanctions and geopolitical tensions. We do not expect new large-scale direct investment to take place. Investment from non-Western countries is more likely to flow in, although the difficult operational environment will expose such foreign investors to particularly high risks, which may outweigh expected returns. The government will try to secure investment from China, the rest of Asia and the Middle East, but any such efforts are unlikely to compensate for the significant outflows of Western FDI.
Potential There is wide potential for higher FDI in Russia, for instance in the underdeveloped hi-tech sector or in the energy sector for the exploration of Arctic oil and gas reserves. However, FDI will remain constrained by international financial sanctions that the EU and the US imposed on Russia starting in 2014 and accelerated significantly since February 2022. Most notably, sectoral sanctions specifically target the energy, defence and financial sectors, and restrict the export of dual-use, oil-drilling and defence equipment to Russia, making investment in these sectors extremely difficult. We believe that these sanctions will remain in place over the forecast period. East-West tensions will remain near all-time highs, Western banks are unlikely to finance large-scale projects in Russia for fear of sanctions, and the Russian business environment will remain exceptionally difficult. As a result, FDI to Russia will remain severely constrained in the medium to long term.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2016 2021 2026
Population (m)
Total 148.3 148.9 147.8
 Male 68.7 69.0 68.6
 Female 79.6 79.9 79.3
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 16.8 17.1 15.9
 15-64 69.1 66.7 65.3
 65+ 14.1 16.2 18.8
Young-age dependency ratio 0.24 0.26 0.24
Old-age dependency ratio 0.20 0.24 0.29
Working-age population (m) 102.5 99.3 96.5
Urbanisation (% of total) 74.2 74.9 75.6
Labour force (m) 76.6 75.3 73.3
       
Period averages   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth (%)   0.1 -0.2
Working-age population growth (%)   -0.6 -0.6
Labour force growth (%)   -0.3 -0.6
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   12.8 11.6
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   12.9 13.0
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   6.7 6.2
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   66.3 67.5
 Female   77.2 78.0
 Average   71.8 72.8
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; EIU estimates and forecasts; national statistics.
Russia's already unfavourable demographics could worsen further From 2014 onwards population data include Crimea, which was illegally annexed by Russia in March 2014 following an illegal referendum that has not been recognised by the international community. This artificially added 2.9m people to Russia's population statistics. The inclusion of Crimea in Russia's demographic projections reflects the fact that Russia's national accounts include economic activity on the Crimean peninsula, whereas Ukraine's national accounts do not.
Russia suffered a serious demographic shock following the collapse of the Soviet Union. The population shrank by 5.2m between 1993 and 2008, when the population hit a low of 143.2m. Over the following 11 years immigration outpaced natural population decline. That and the inclusion of Crimea in official statistics caused Russia's population to climb back up to an estimated 149m in 2021. The mortality rate has exceeded the birth rate for more than 20 years owing to low fertility rates, below-standard healthcare and poor lifestyles. The stress of the transition to capitalism in the 1990s further contributed to falling birth rates and increased morbidity.
The population has largely stabilised over the past five years. The birth rate increased from 2001 but started to decline from 2016. It stood at 12.8 per 1,000 on average in 2017-21, up from 9.1 in 2001. The mortality rate per 1,000 people has been declining since 2005 and stood at 12.9 in 2017-21, down from 16 in 2005. The rise in life expectancy has offset low fertility rates, although not enough to decelerate Russia's demographic decline.
Average male life expectancy in Russia declined significantly in the 1990s and was still below 60 as late as 2005. There has been some recovery since then, and life expectancy at birth is currently about 67 years for men and 78 years for women. Alcoholism and higher rates of smoking account for much of the gap in life expectancy. Heart disease and high blood pressure are among the main causes of premature death, along with car accidents (especially in northern regions). The incidence of tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS is underreported but high, especially in remote regions.
Low life expectancy and falling births will keep population growth negative Considerable net immigration has mitigated Russia's underlying poor demographics. A large proportion of foreigners come from other post-Soviet countries. However, the war in Ukraine and deteriorating economic conditions will probably roll back this trend as Russia become less attractive to foreign businesses and migrant workers. This will aggravate a trend already started during the coronavirus pandemic, which significantly reduced the number of migrants entering Russia. Meanwhile, the war will also trigger emigration of Russian nationals, in particular well-educated individuals, who believe the country offers no future. Thousands of people have already left Russia since the invasion started in February 2022 and we expect this trend to continue.
Meanwhile, life expectancy could be negatively affected as a result of expanded deaths from the coronavirus pandemic and the anticipated economic decline as a result of sanctions. Russia has been among the worst-hit countries by the pandemic, registering over 1.2m excess deaths since 2020; low vaccination rates will ensure that Russian population remains vulnerable to the spread of new variants. Real GDP is expected to decline on average in 2022-26. Real incomes are likely to fall, which will place pressure on households and, in turn, drag birth rates down. The government has sought to boost the population by providing financial incentives to encourage women to have children; however we do not expect the same high level of social support to be sustained over the medium term. The share of women aged 20-29 is forecast to fall significantly in 2022-26.
Russia has an ageing population, which will prove increasingly difficult to support. We project that the working-age (15-65) population will fall by 1.4m between 2021 and 2026. In 2018 the government raised the pension age by five years for women (to 60) and five years for men (to 65, in the region of male life expectancy). Despite this recent reform, pension liabilities will remain a growing burden on the public finances in the coming years, all the more so as reforms of pension benefits are highly controversial and the authorities remain wary of triggering potential social unrest. Immigration from Central Asia will continue to provide a large pool of flexible, low-cost labour-much of it in the grey economy.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Population (m) 148.9 148.8 148.6 148.4 148.1 147.8
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,771 1,915 1,909 1,897 1,955 1,991
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 11,892 12,869 12,842 12,779 13,195 13,467
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 4,773 4,553 4,595 4,752 4,938 5,112
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 32,046 30,595 30,911 32,023 33,333 34,580
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 934 953 1,015 1,046 1,108 1,173
Median household income (US$) 9,725 11,263 11,526 11,790 12,538 13,399
Household consumption (US$ bn) 889 910 960 977 1,013 1,046
Household consumption per head (US$) 5,970 6,110 6,460 6,580 6,840 7,080
Exports of goods & services (% change) 3.4 -11.9 -4.9 3.3 3.7 3.6
Imports of goods & services (% change) 16.3 -24.0 6.0 4.8 3.9 5.8
In 2022 we expect Russia to experience its deepest recession since 1992 Russia's economy will experience a severe contraction in 2022, which we currently forecast at 10%. Even if Russia and Ukraine reach a settlement to the conflict, we do not expect sanctions to be lifted in our 2022-26 forecast period. Diplomatic and economic isolation from the West will have far-reaching implications on Russia's economy, unravelling a period of economic stagnation. The war in Ukraine will embolden factions in favour of a "nationalisation" of the economy to the disadvantage of market liberalisation policies. Russia is likely to enact more protectionist trade measures, including export restrictions and import substitutions to replace foreign goods. Other measures remain possible across a range of sectors, which could disrupt the operations of companies relying on cross-border supply chains. However, the authorities will continue to welcome investment to develop domestic production of established foreign brands.
A state-driven economy will be set on a low-growth trend, which means that real GDP will contract on average by 1.6% in 2022-26. Once growth turns positive in 2024, it will not climb above 2%. GDP per head (at purchasing power parity) reached US$29,380 in 2020. We forecast that it will increase to US$34,580 in 2026.
Disposable personal incomes in Russia, low by European standards, dipped below US$7,000 per head in 2021. Insufficient government support for households will further erode disposable incomes, which will contract by almost 17% in 2022. Going forward, we expect private consumption to be among the worst-affected sectors of the Russian economy, with a forecast contraction of above 10% in 2022 and a average of 5% in 2023-26, a sharp fall from pre-war levels; private consumption growth stood at 9.5% in 2021. The recovery will be slow and will depend on the government's ability to substantially lower inflation, ensure job stability and manage supply-chain disruptions. Wage growth will record a negative growth through the forecast period.
Income differentials will remain extremely wide, and incomes in the capital, Moscow, tend to be considerably higher than in smaller cities and the countryside. High levels of income inequality have led to a bifurcation of consumer markets. At lower income levels, declining incomes have triggered long-lasting shifts in household spending patterns, with a greater emphasis on price competitiveness and basic household goods. Public financing constraints are likely to restrict the investment in infrastructure and communications needed for consumer-centred businesses to thrive outside of the big cities
Sanctions will have severe implications for the automotive sector The EU has imposed a ban on the export of luxury goods to Russia, one of the strongest markets in Europe for these products. Nevertheless, the government's decision to legalise parallel imports as a temporary measure to prevent goods shortages in the domestic market will improve availability of these products. Sanctions will have severe implications for the automotive sector as it is highly dependent on foreign investment and Western imported components. Several automakers have halted or suspended operations in Russia, owing to international sanctions, supply-chain disruptions and safety concerns for their employees. This will not only hit domestic production but also dampen exports. Returning older models to production will mitigate the shock to the sector, but disruption will nevertheless persist over the forecast period.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
US$ bn            
Food, beverages & tobacco 347.1 351.1 356.4 361.4 374.8 386.2
Housing & household fuels 107.0 110.4 125.0 126.1 128.2 129.8
Clothing & footwear 72.5 69.5 66.1 67.9 70.8 73.5
Household goods & services 50.9 48.9 46.7 45.8 47.5 49.0
Health 38.6 41.4 47.9 49.4 51.4 53.3
Transport & communications 158.5 171.0 199.9 209.3 221.3 232.9
Leisure & education 71.8 74.7 75.6 74.9 77.0 78.7
Hotels & restaurants 26.1 25.8 26.2 26.0 26.5 26.9
Other 16.7 17.1 16.5 16.0 16.0 16.0
Total 889.2 910.0 960.1 976.7 1,013.5 1,046.2
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 39.0 38.6 37.1 37.0 37.0 36.9
Housing & household fuels 12.0 12.1 13.0 12.9 12.6 12.4
Clothing & footwear 8.2 7.6 6.9 7.0 7.0 7.0
Household goods & services 5.7 5.4 4.9 4.7 4.7 4.7
Health 4.3 4.6 5.0 5.1 5.1 5.1
Transport & communications 17.8 18.8 20.8 21.4 21.8 22.3
Leisure & education 8.1 8.2 7.9 7.7 7.6 7.5
Hotels & restaurants 2.9 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.6 2.6
Other 1.9 1.9 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.5
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2021   2026  
  Russia Eastern Europe (av) Russia Eastern Europe (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 5.8 6.5 5.7 6.4
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 690 830 774 1,106
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 6.5 6.2 6.1 5.7
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 4.3 3.7 4.6 3.9
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 39.0 33.4 36.9 30.6
Meat consumption (kg per person) 76.9 71.4 73.6 66.0
Milk consumption (litres per person) 166.0 180.0 165.0 172.0
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 2.9 2.8 3.0 2.8
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 314 336 305 340
Telephone main lines 159 144 114 107
Mobile phone subscribers 1,640 1,450 1,710 1,510
Television sets 1,092 1,040 1,271 1,234
Personal computers 741 758 885 861
Households
No. of households (m) 60.9 116.6 62.6 120.3
No. of people per household (av) 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.3
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 11,260 15,740 14,210 23,840
Average monthly wage (US$) 759 946 954 1,330
Gini index 35.3 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); EIU estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population -0.20 -0.27 -0.25
Working-age population -0.62 -0.51 -0.55
Working-age minus total population -0.43 -0.24 -0.30
Labour force -0.65 -0.39 -0.47
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head -0.3 1.7 1.1
Growth of real GDP -0.5 1.4 0.8
Labour productivity growth -0.1 1.8 1.2
Growth of capital stock 0.6 2.1 1.6
Total factor productivity growth -0.5 0.9 0.5
Skills levels compare favourably with those in many emerging markets Initial conditions: Russia's natural resources are a mixed blessing. During the decade to 2014 high oil prices and favourable terms of trade were the main drivers of growth. However, there is a significant negative correlation between long-term growth and natural-resource dependency. This is a result of the "Dutch disease"-whereby an overvalued exchange rate (as a result of commodity exports) prevents the development of globally competitive non-resource sectors-as well as widespread opportunities for rent-seeking. Russia's size (about 17m sq km) is an economic disadvantage, as it implies long distances between population, natural resources and business centres, as well as 11 different time zones, although around four-fifths of Russians live in the European part of the country. State involvement in the economy is high and has risen in recent years, and soft budget constraints have sustained a large number of internationally uncompetitive manufacturing firms.
Workforce skills levels may still compare favourably with those in many emerging markets. In aptitude tests, pupils perform close to the OECD average and significantly better than peers in many emerging markets. The number of adults with tertiary education is significantly above the OECD average, largely as a legacy of the educational system of the former Soviet Union. Nevertheless, over the past three decades Russia has suffered some deterioration in its human capital. Russia's technological resources are being depleted, as evidenced by the decline in the research and development sector and the education system.
Demographic trends: The demographic profile is unfavourable, combining negative features of the developed and developing worlds (a falling and ageing population, comparatively low life expectancy and a declining working-age population). The UN has revised up its baseline forecast for Russia's population, but the outlook remains poor, owing to relatively low birth rates, below-standard medical care and a high mortality rate. Based on UN forecasts, EIU projects that the population will decline to about 138.6m by 2050, down from 148.9m in 2021 (this includes the population of Crimea, which Russia annexed illegally in 2014). Crucially, the working-age population is likely to shrink even more quickly than the population as a whole.
A weak demographic outlook will weigh on growth In the absence of large-scale immigration-made difficult by domestic political considerations, widespread popular suspicion towards foreigners (especially from Western countries) and international tensions-Russia is unlikely to have the labour resources to sustain high rates of economic growth. The government recently raised the retirement age (to 60 for women, and 65 for men), but the current pension system is inadequate to manage rising liabilities. Further increases in the retirement age are unlikely until life expectancy starts improving more rapidly. Poor health will continue to affect the quality of the workforce and make it all the more difficult to sustain the productivity improvements needed for catch-up growth. Investment in healthcare is likely to remain well below the OECD average as a share of GDP. The ageing population will impose increasing pension costs that will exert strong pressure on the budget and may act as a brake on reform.
External conditions: Russia's energy-driven economy benefited greatly in 2005-14 from high oil prices and favourable movements in the terms of trade. The current trend of exceptionally high oil prices will be gradually reversed and this will continue in the longer term as increased global supply and climate change policies hold down the value of Russia's main export. High tensions with the West and overreaching sanctions on the Russian economy are likely to endure for many years. This will depress foreign investment, place restrictions on the import of technological equipment necessary for the maintenance and development of industry, divert resources to military expenditure, and encourage statist and illiberal trends within Russia. A limited pivot to high-growth countries in Asia will yield some benefits, but economic integration will be constrained by deficiencies in infrastructure. The impact of climate change may be mixed: rising temperatures could boost agricultural yields in some areas, but increase the likelihood of wildfires and drought in others.
Competition is low and the regulatory burden high Institutions and policy trends: Institutional deficiencies abound, and the concentration of economic power in a few massive conglomerates impedes competition. Over the long-term forecast period (2022-50) the state's participation in the economy is likely to expand further. Sustained economic growth, especially beyond a certain level of development, requires a climate of political openness in which policies are subject to public scrutiny, minimising the scope for corruption and maximising the chances for good governance. The prospects for such an opening have been slim and have become even more so following the latest confrontation with the West, which has contributed to strengthening authoritarian trends and sweeping political illiberalism. International sanctions, which are likely to last for many years even if the war in Ukraine comes to some sort of resolution, have also consolidated groups within the policymaking elite that favour statist development models and import substitution, making it less likely that the economy will be opened up to greater competition. Attempts to reduce the regulatory burden on business can be expected, but an inefficient and cumbersome bureaucracy, as well as regional discrepancies, will hinder policy implementation. Far-reaching reforms to strengthen the rule of law and increase competition are not our core forecast, but remain possible. Russian per capita income is already higher than the quality of the country's institutions would lead us to expect. Major reform could therefore deliver a much higher per capita growth trajectory than currently forecast. However, given the consolidation of anti-Western attitudes within the elite, and the dominant role played by the security services, there is a risk that the government will respond to weak economic growth by further tightening social controls, while maintaining tensions with the West at a high level.
Long-term performance: The war in Ukraine and the decoupling of the Russian economy from the West are the main reasons for Russia's economic woes. In practice, however, Russia's economy has been weakening for years owing to a lack of structural reforms, economic diversification, corruption, and underinvestment. Although structural economic reforms are needed, we do not expect the government to pursue reforms in our forecast period as this could threaten social stability. An unfavourable demographic profile, difficult business environment, fragile banking sector, low productivity growth, weak institutions and overreliance on natural resources will place strong constraints on Russia's long-term growth.
Given its strong industrial tradition and well-educated workforce, Russia's chances of diversifying its economy could be good, but this prospect has receded following the sharp deterioration in political and economic relations with the West. Catch-up with the advanced Western economies could only be marginal at best even if the economy performs better than we currently forecast. Convergence prospects with developed Europe therefore appear poor. On the basis of Russia's initial conditions and UN demographic forecasts, as well as an assumption of limited policy improvement over the medium term, We forecast average growth in real GDP of 0.8% and real GDP per head of 1.1% in 2022-50.
Income and market size
  2021 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 148.9 146.3 138.6
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,771.1 2,262.5 4,865.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 11,890 15,470 35,120
Private consumption (US$ bn) 889.2 1,169.6 2,600.2
Private consumption per head (US$) 5,970 8,000 18,770
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 4,772.8 5,760.9 11,295.6
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 32,050 39,380 81,530
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 549.7 663.1 1,335.6
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 377.9 446.4 914.7
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 46.4 40.7 44.4
Share of world population (%) 1.9 1.8 1.5
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 1.9 1.5 1.2
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.0 0.0 0.0
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 2.0 1.5 1.0
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability EIU has developed a model to calculate the impact of climate change on long-term growth, and we find that the Russian economy will be more than 2.5% smaller at end-2050 than it would have been without this hit to growth. A report released in March 2018 by Antistikhiya, a research centre affiliated with the Russian Ministry of Emergency Situations, estimates that the long-term economic cost of climate change could amount to Rb900bn (US$12.5bn, or about 1% of GDP). According to the report, average winter temperatures across Russia may rise by 2-5°C by the middle of the century. This would have a significant impact on Russia's northern territories. The Arctic Ocean is expected to be largely ice-free and navigable in the summer months by 2025-30, which could potentially allow for the Northern Sea Route to emerge as a major transit corridor between China and Europe (although major investment in infrastructure would be required). However, higher temperatures will also lead to the melting of permafrost in some northern areas, causing infrastructure-including roads, buildings and pipelines-to sink into marshes. Permafrost covers 65% of the country, and 93% of gas production and 75% of oil production is located in permafrost regions; in Siberia alone there are 350,000 km of energy pipelines. The energy sector already suffers from a high number of leakages and accidents; according to Greenpeace, an environmental campaign group, about 35,000 accidents happen every year in western Siberia's oil and gas sector, about 20% of which are due to buckling pipelines. The impact of climate change on the agricultural sector will be mixed. Northern parts of the country will become more temperate, allowing for an increase in arable land. However, this will be offset by a decline in the productivity of regions further south and west, which will lead to increased incidents of droughts and wild fires. The Russian government has shown limited interest in pursuing policies to limit carbon emissions amid low popular concern about global warming.
International financial sanctions Since Russia launched a full-scale armed campaign against Ukraine on February 24th 2022, the US and the EU and their international partners-the UK, Canada, Japan, Australia and New Zealand-have imposed stringent sanctions on Russia on a scale much greater than the sanctions imposed following the 2014 annexation of Crimea. As of July 2022 about half of Russia's central bank foreign reserves have been frozen, as have billions of personal and company assets abroad. The West has imposed a ban on the import on Russian oil, steel and coal and has expanded the ban on the export of advanced technology and dual-use goods to Russia. The sanctions also restrict Russia's logistical abilities to trade with Russian airspace being close by the EU, UK, US and Canada, a ban on the insurance of Russian vessels by European companies. The sanctions on Russia's financial sector have been expanded with most large banks having been excluded from the SWIFT international payments system, including Sberbank and VTB. These sanctions mark a new level of the West's approach towards Russia. The imposition of further sanctions is highly likely as long as the conflict in Ukraine continues. We expect sanctions to remain in place for years, even after the conflict in Ukraine is resolved. The West, and the EU in particular, will strive towards a full decoupling from Russia by reducing reliance on Russian hydrocarbons and other commodities. The severance of these economic ties would make a rapprochement of relations over the long term extremely difficult. Unlike the sanctions after the annexation of Crimea, the latest rounds have a much more direct macroeconomic impact-large-scale Western divestment, a collapse in imports and an oil embargo will all translate into a significant blow to the Russian economy. The loss of the European market and shortages of industrial components will have a long-term impact on Russia's manufacturing and industrial sectors. This is likely to further reduce the funds available for infrastructure, education, healthcare, social spending and other long-term investment priorities.
The latest sanctions will push Russia to advance its partnership with economies in the global South as a counterweight to the West (such as the BRICS-Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa-and smaller "non-aligned countries"). Russia will push for the abandonment of the dollar in bilateral trade and for the consolidation of payments systems alternative to SWIFT. However, Russia's recent experience has underlined the deep economic power assymetries with the West and the limitations of its eastward pivot.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 3.2 3.0 2.3 -3.7 5.7 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.6
EU27 GDP growth 2.9 2.1 1.8 -6.1 5.4 2.4 1.8 2.1 2.0 1.9
Euro area GDP growth 2.7 1.8 1.6 -6.6 5.4 2.2 1.6 1.9 1.8 1.8
Eastern Europe growth 3.3 3.7 3.3 -3.2 5.4 -4.0 1.6 3.0 2.9 2.7
World trade growth 5.6 3.8 0.2 -4.9 10.9 4.3 4.2 3.8 3.6 3.6
US CPI 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.7 7.7 3.7 1.6 2.1 2.1
EU27 CPI 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.8 7.2 3.3 2.1 2.0 1.9
Manufactures export price 2.0 5.1 -1.4 0.8 5.8 2.8 2.2 3.2 2.4 1.6
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 70.4 107.9 95.5 86.5 78.0 69.0
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 138.7 150.5 154.8 149.5 146.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Expenditure on GDP (Rb bn at current market prices) c
GDP 91,764 103,668 109,565 107,214 130,450 144,159 157,799 168,066 177,372 185,253
Private consumption 48,542 52,266 56,516 54,688 65,490 68,498 79,367 86,557 91,974 97,351
Government consumption 16,741 18,402 19,844 21,500 23,275 29,290 33,783 36,751 39,533 42,127
Gross fixed investment 20,117 21,479 22,800 22,889 25,639 21,970 23,189 24,717 26,423 28,220
Exports of goods & services 24,011 32,046 31,280 27,552 40,488 46,197 48,033 50,899 53,280 54,968
Imports of goods & services 19,024 21,538 22,784 21,905 27,837 24,297 29,072 33,358 36,338 39,911
Stockbuilding 1,495 1,227 1,957 2,155 3,678 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000
Domestic demand 86,895 93,373 101,117 101,232 118,082 121,759 138,339 150,025 159,930 169,697
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices) c
GDP 1,573 1,654 1,692 1,487 1,771 1,915 1,909 1,897 1,955 1,991
Private consumption 832 834 873 758 889 910 960 977 1,013 1,046
Government consumption 287 294 307 298 316 389 409 415 436 453
Gross fixed investment 345 343 352 317 348 292 281 279 291 303
Exports of goods & services 412 511 483 382 550 614 581 574 587 591
Imports of goods & services 326 344 352 304 378 323 352 376 400 429
Stockbuilding 26 20 30 30 50 27 24 23 22 21
Domestic demand 1,489 1,490 1,562 1,404 1,603 1,618 1,673 1,693 1,762 1,824
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices) c
Private consumption 52.9 50.4 51.6 51.0 50.2 47.5 50.3 51.5 51.9 52.6
Government consumption 18.2 17.8 18.1 20.1 17.8 20.3 21.4 21.9 22.3 22.7
Gross fixed investment 21.9 20.7 20.8 21.3 19.7 15.2 14.7 14.7 14.9 15.2
Stockbuilding 1.6 1.2 1.8 2.0 2.8 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.1
Exports of goods & services 26.2 30.9 28.5 25.7 31.0 32.0 30.4 30.3 30.0 29.7
Imports of goods & services 20.7 20.8 20.8 20.4 21.3 16.9 18.4 19.8 20.5 21.5
Memorandum items
Oil production (m tonnes) 580 589 594 543 574 540 491 496 501 –
National savings ratio (%) 25.6 28.9 26.5 25.8 29.4 26.7 23.7 22.4 22.7 22.7
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c Data include a statistical discrepancy.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Real expenditure on GDP (Rb bn at constant 2016 market prices) c
GDP 87,161 89,590 91,510 89,106 93,276 83,950 81,768 83,079 84,542 85,720
Private consumption 47,265 49,253 51,093 47,370 51,853 45,035 44,207 45,136 45,904 46,764
Government consumption 16,212 16,417 16,804 17,131 17,397 17,918 18,277 18,514 18,774 19,055
Gross fixed investment 19,631 19,885 19,972 19,003 20,261 16,614 16,780 17,116 17,509 17,895
Exports of goods & services 23,237 24,545 24,725 23,703 24,514 21,586 20,539 21,223 22,015 22,803
Imports of goods & services 20,704 21,308 21,901 19,335 22,491 17,103 18,135 19,010 19,760 20,897
Domestic demand 84,635 86,598 88,736 84,482 91,065 79,467 79,364 80,866 82,286 83,814
Real expenditure on GDP (% change) c
GDP 1.8 2.8 2.1 -2.6 4.7 -10.0 -2.6 1.6 1.8 1.4
Private consumption 3.6 4.2 3.7 -7.3 9.5 -13.1 -1.8 2.1 1.7 1.9
Government consumption 2.5 1.3 2.4 2.0 1.5 3.0 2.0 1.3 1.4 1.5
Gross fixed investment 5.8 1.3 0.4 -4.9 6.6 -18.0 1.0 2.0 2.3 2.2
Exports of goods & services 5.1 5.6 0.7 -4.1 3.4 -11.9 -4.9 3.3 3.7 3.6
Imports of goods & services 17.3 2.9 2.8 -11.7 16.3 -24.0 6.0 4.8 3.9 5.8
Domestic demand 4.4 2.3 2.5 -4.8 7.8 -12.7 -0.1 1.9 1.8 1.9
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points) c
Private consumption 1.9 2.3 2.1 -4.1 5.0 -7.3 -1.0 1.1 0.9 1.0
Government consumption 0.5 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3
Gross fixed investment 1.3 0.3 0.1 -1.1 1.4 -3.9 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.5
External balance -2.3 0.8 -0.5 1.7 -2.6 2.6 -2.5 -0.2 0.1 -0.4
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c Data include a statistical discrepancy.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Origin of GDP (Rb bn at constant 2016 prices)
GDP at factor cost 78,499 80,684 82,458 80,444 84,141 75,729 73,761 74,943 76,262 77,325
Agriculture 3,337 3,394 3,511 3,517 3,472 3,146 3,057 3,106 3,176 3,220
Industry 25,429 26,162 26,568 25,950 27,222 24,419 23,792 24,181 24,599 24,965
Services 49,733 51,117 52,347 51,101 53,668 48,132 46,880 47,624 48,455 49,108
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 1.5 1.7 3.5 0.2 -1.3 -9.4 -2.8 1.6 2.3 1.4
Industry 1.8 2.9 1.6 -2.3 4.9 -10.3 -2.6 1.6 1.7 1.5
Services 1.9 2.8 2.4 -2.4 5.0 -10.3 -2.6 1.6 1.7 1.3
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 4.3 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.1 4.2 4.1 4.1 4.2 4.2
Industry 32.4 32.4 32.2 32.3 32.4 32.2 32.3 32.3 32.3 32.3
Services 63.4 63.4 63.5 63.5 63.8 63.6 63.6 63.5 63.5 63.5
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 1.9 b 2.5 b 3.0 b -0.8 b 3.0 -6.5 -3.8 1.1 1.3 0.9
Total factor productivity growth 1.9 2.4 2.5 -1.4 3.4 -7.2 -3.3 1.4 1.5 1.1
Growth of capital stock 0.2 0.7 0.5 -0.1 0.6 a -1.6 -1.3 -1.0 -0.6 -0.3
Growth of potential GDP 1.6 2.5 2.0 -1.8 4.0 a -8.5 -3.9 0.8 0.9 0.6
Growth of real GDP 1.8 b 2.8 b 2.1 b -2.6 b 4.7 -10.0 -2.6 1.6 1.8 1.4
Growth of real GDP per head 1.7 b 2.6 b 2.1 b -2.7 b 4.7 -9.9 -2.5 1.8 1.9 1.6
a EIU estimates. b Actual. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Population, income and market size c
Population (m) 148.6 148.8 148.9 149.0 148.9 148.8 148.6 148.4 148.1 147.8
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,573 1,654 1,692 1,487 1,771 1,915 1,909 1,897 1,955 1,991
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 10,590 11,120 11,370 9,980 11,890 12,870 12,840 12,780 13,190 13,470
Private consumption (US$ bn) 832 834 873 758 889 910 960 977 1,013 1,046
Private consumption per head (US$) 5,600 5,610 5,860 5,090 5,970 6,110 6,460 6,580 6,840 7,080
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 3,804 4,224 4,411 4,377 4,773 4,553 4,595 4,752 4,938 5,112
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 25,600 28,390 29,620 29,380 32,050 30,600 30,910 32,020 33,330 34,580
Personal disposable income (Rb bn) 54,964 57,191 60,762 57,764 d 68,786 d 71,760 83,871 92,699 100,556 109,117
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 942 913 939 801 d 934 d 953 1,015 1,046 1,108 1,173
Growth of real disposable income (%) 2.9 d 0.7 d 1.9 d -8.9 d 8.9 d -13.4 -1.0 3.5 3.8 4.4
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 1.98 1.97 1.95 1.94 1.92 1.90 1.90 1.90 1.89 1.83
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 1.96 1.94 1.96 1.77 1.87 1.92 1.81 1.70 1.65 1.63
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 3.16 3.31 3.31 3.33 3.29 2.89 2.73 2.68 2.65 2.65
Share of world exports of goods (%) 2.04 2.34 2.28 1.95 2.28 1.88 1.67 1.51 1.47 1.53
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c From 2014 official Russian statistics include economic activity on the Crimean peninsula. d EIU estimates.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Federal government expenditure 17.9 16.1 16.6 21.3 19.0 24.6 21.0 21.3 20.4 20.5
Interest 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.1 0.3 1.3 0.2 0.2
Non-interest 17.1 15.3 16.0 20.6 18.2 24.5 20.7 20.0 20.3 20.3
Federal government revenue 16.4 18.8 18.4 17.5 19.4 20.8 16.2 17.5 17.1 17.3
Federal budget balance -1.5 2.6 1.8 -3.8 0.4 -3.8 -4.8 -3.9 -3.3 -3.2
Primary balance -0.7 3.4 2.5 -3.1 1.2 -3.7 -4.5 -2.6 -3.1 -3.0
Government debt 11.4 10.3 12.6 17.7 15.6 20.7 24.6 27.6 30.3 33.2
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate Rb:US$ (av) 58.3 62.7 64.7 72.1 73.7 75.3 82.7 88.6 90.7 93.1
Exchange rate Rb:US$ (year-end) 57.6 69.5 61.9 73.9 74.3 76.3 84.6 90.5 91.4 93.3
Exchange rate Rb:€ (av) 65.9 74.0 72.5 82.3 87.2 82.7 94.4 105.9 111.6 115.9
Exchange rate Rb:€ (year-end) 68.9 79.5 69.3 90.7 84.1 85.1 99.4 110.0 113.4 116.6
Real effective exchange-rate index (av), CPI-based, 2010=100 91.4 c 84.5 c 86.7 c 80.3 c 78.9 c 92.5 89.9 84.2 82.5 80.9
Purchasing power parity Rb:US$ (av) 24.1 24.5 24.8 24.5 27.3 31.7 34.3 35.4 35.9 36.2
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 10.5 11.0 9.7 13.5 13.0 17.2 6.3 11.0 13.7 11.1
Domestic credit growth (%) 7.3 3.7 3.7 22.4 13.4 14.7 6.0 10.5 13.3 10.7
Central bank refinancing rate (av; %) 9.0 7.4 7.3 4.9 6.0 10.5 6.3 7.2 4.8 3.9
Lending rate (av; %) 10.6 8.9 8.8 6.8 7.2 10.1 7.0 6.6 5.0 5.0
Deposit rate (av; %) 5.9 5.4 5.4 3.8 3.8 7.8 4.8 3.5 3.5 3.5
Money market rate (av; %) 9.1 7.6 7.7 5.0 6.4 10.9 6.7 7.6 5.2 4.3
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market (av) c
Labour force (m) 76.3 76.2 75.4 74.9 75.3 74.5 74.3 74.0 73.7 73.3
Labour force (% change) -0.5 -0.1 -1.0 -0.6 0.6 -1.2 -0.2 -0.4 -0.4 -0.6
Employment (m) 72.3 72.5 71.9 70.6 71.7 69.1 69.9 70.2 70.6 70.9
Employment (% change) -0.1 0.3 -0.8 -1.9 1.6 -3.7 1.2 0.5 0.5 0.5
Unemployment (m) 4.0 3.7 3.5 4.3 3.6 5.4 4.4 3.8 3.1 2.3
Unemployment rate (%) 5.2 4.8 4.6 5.8 4.8 5.0 5.9 5.1 4.2 3.7
Unemployment rate (end-period; %) 5.2 4.8 4.6 5.8 4.8 6.6 5.5 4.6 3.8 2.9
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
Consumer prices (av) 3.7 2.9 4.5 3.4 6.7 21.2 12.1 6.4 5.1 4.0
Consumer prices (year-end) 2.5 4.3 3.0 4.9 8.3 23.6 9.1 5.7 4.5 4.0
Producer prices (av) 7.6 12.2 2.0 -3.8 24.4 28.1 15.6 10.4 9.8 8.0
GDP deflator (av) 5.4 9.9 3.5 0.5 16.2 d 22.8 12.4 4.8 3.7 3.0
Private consumption deflator (av) 2.7 3.3 4.2 4.4 9.4 d 20.4 18.0 6.8 4.5 3.9
Government consumption deflator (av) 3.3 8.6 5.4 6.3 6.6 d 22.2 13.1 7.4 6.1 5.0
Fixed investment deflator (av) 3.1 5.4 5.7 5.5 5.1 d 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5
Average nominal wages 6.6 10.9 9.2 7.6 10.8 12.0 5.0 7.3 7.0 7.5
Average real wages 2.8 7.8 4.5 4.1 3.8 -7.6 -6.3 0.8 1.8 3.4
Unit labour costs (Rb-based; av) 4.5 8.3 6.0 8.4 7.5 19.8 9.1 6.1 5.7 6.6
Unit labour costs (US$-based) 20.1 0.8 2.6 -2.7 5.2 17.3 -0.7 -1.0 3.2 3.9
Labour costs per hour (Rb) 217.5 241.3 263.4 283.4 313.9 351.6 369.1 396.1 423.8 455.6
Labour costs per hour (US$) 3.73 3.85 4.07 3.93 4.26 4.67 4.47 4.47 4.67 4.90
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c From 2014 official Russian statistics include economic activity on the Crimean peninsula. d EIU estimates.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 32.2 115.7 65.5 36.0 122.0 192.8 147.6 122.5 131.4 127.8
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.0 7.0 3.9 2.4 6.9 10.1 7.7 6.5 6.7 6.4
Goods: exports fob 352.9 443.9 419.7 333.4 493.8 464.1 430.8 408.6 420.2 413.9
Goods: imports fob -238.4 -248.9 -253.9 -239.6 -304.0 -193.8 -182.7 -183.2 -187.4 -196.5
Trade balance 114.6 195.1 165.8 93.7 189.8 270.4 248.1 225.4 232.8 217.4
Services: credit 57.5 64.6 61.9 48.1 56.0 55.9 53.0 58.4 61.4 63.9
Services: debit -88.9 -94.7 -98.5 -64.5 -75.5 -68.5 -78.5 -81.3 -85.6 -89.5
Services balance -31.3 -30.1 -36.6 -16.4 -19.5 -12.7 -25.5 -22.9 -24.2 -25.6
Primary income: credit 46.6 52.9 53.9 44.8 81.1 30.9 29.4 27.6 32.1 34.1
Primary income: debit -88.6 -93.3 -107.4 -79.8 -124.4 -90.2 -98.6 -101.9 -103.3 -92.1
Primary income balance -42.1 -40.4 -53.5 -35.0 -43.3 -59.4 -69.2 -74.3 -71.3 -58.1
Secondary income: credit 10.6 12.4 14.7 13.4 14.3 15.3 15.0 14.9 15.4 15.7
Secondary income: debit -19.6 -21.3 -24.8 -19.7 -19.3 -20.8 -20.8 -20.6 -21.3 -21.7
Secondary income balance -9.0 -8.9 -10.2 -6.3 -5.0 -5.6 -5.8 -5.7 -5.9 -6.0
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 72.3 86.0 80.6 66.8 c 86.6 c 110.5 109.0 103.2 100.6 96.6
Export prices (% change) 19.2 19.0 -6.3 -17.2 c 29.7 c 27.6 -1.3 -5.4 -2.5 -3.9
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 97.2 99.0 98.7 106.0 c 110.4 c 116.2 119.6 123.3 126.0 127.6
Import prices (% change) 6.4 1.9 -0.3 7.4 c 4.2 c 5.2 2.9 3.1 2.2 1.2
Terms of trade (2010=100) 74.4 86.9 81.7 63.0 c 78.4 c 95.1 91.2 83.7 79.8 75.7
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 6.5 c 3.9 c 1.9 c -4.9 c 8.7 c 2.8 3.5 4.1 3.9 3.6
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment 28.6 8.8 32.0 9.5 15.0 1.0 3.0 10.0 12.0 12.5
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 1.8 0.5 1.9 0.6 0.8 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.6 0.6
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 8.3 2.6 9.1 3.0 4.3 0.3 1.1 3.6 4.1 4.1
Outward direct investment -36.8 -31.4 -21.9 -5.8 -17.0 -5.0 -8.0 -20.0 -22.0 -20.0
Net foreign direct investment -8.2 -22.6 10.1 3.6 -2.0 -4.0 -5.0 -10.0 -10.0 -7.5
Stock of inward direct investment 529.6 497.4 587.0 539.7 609.6 610.6 613.6 623.6 635.6 648.1
Stock of inward direct investment per head (US$) 3,565 3,343 3,942 3,623 4,093 4,103 4,128 4,202 4,291 4,385
Stock of inward direct investment (% of GDP) 33.7 30.1 34.7 36.3 34.4 31.9 32.1 32.9 32.5 32.6
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 1.40 2.25 3.09 0.94 1.34 0.08 0.23 0.75 0.87 0.87
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 1.76 1.55 1.72 1.61 1.65 1.50 1.44 1.42 1.39 1.36
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 514.3 471.9 484.2 475.5 471.2 362.0 313.6 297.2 297.1 310.4
Total external debt (% of GDP) 32.7 28.5 28.6 32.0 26.6 18.9 16.4 15.7 15.2 15.6
Debt/exports ratio (%) 110.5 82.7 88.7 109.0 73.7 65.1 60.0 59.0 56.8 59.6
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 17.4 19.3 17.6 22.4 12.7 15.0 14.0 12.6 11.6 11.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data are for historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU.
Global data Historical series: UN; OECD; IMF
Oil prices: Dated Brent crude average price
Domestic data OECD, Economic Surveys: Russian Federation
Population: Rosstat; US Census Bureau
Balance of payments: CBR; IMF, IFS
Foreign direct investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report; CBR
Inflation: Rosstat
Exchange rate: roubles per US dollar: IMF, IFS; CBR
Real effective exchange rate: index, 1997=100; trade-weighted, based on 20 leading partners
GDP growth and expenditure breakdown: Rosstat
US$ PPP GDP: 2005 International Comparison Programme benchmark estimate extrapolated on the basis of Russian and US GDP deflators
Export and import price indices: US dollar-based; 2008=100
External debt data: World Bank, International Debt Statistics
Abbreviations CBR: Central Bank of Russia
IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Rosstat (formerly Goskomstat): Federal State Statistics Service
UN: United Nations
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows the EIU to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by the EIU for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2017-21) and from EIU assessments for the forecast period (2022-26). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by the EIU for 2017-21. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2022-26 are based on EIU assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; the EIU, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2017-21 ranges are then used to derive 2022-26 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2022-26, not to the likely situation in 2026 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2019 or 2024). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2017-21   2022-26  
  Russia Regional average a Russia Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 2 4.1 1 3.9
  2. Risk of social unrest 3 3.3 2 3.1
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 3 3.5 2 3.3
  4. Government and opposition 3 3.4 3 3.4
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 3 3.7 3 3.9
  6. International disputes or tensions 2 3.1 1 2.5
  7. Government policy towards business 2 3.3 2 3.3
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 3 2.7 2 3.0
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 2 2.4 2 2.8
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 2 2.5 1 2.8
 11. Efficiency of legal system 2 2.8 2 3.0
 12. Corruption 1 2.3 1 2.7
 13. Impact of crime 3 3.3 2 3.8
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 4 4.6 4 4.1
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 5 3.8 3 3.4
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 5 4.2 5 4.1
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 3 4.1 2 3.6
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 5 4.3 5 4.3
  6. Quality of policymaking 3 3.2 2 3.4
  7. Institutional underpinnings 3 3.5 3 3.6
  8. Asset prices 2 2.3 1 2.4
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 5 2.9 5 3.1
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 4 4.2 4 4.4
  3. Real GDP growth* 2 2.6 1 2.8
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 4 2.1 4 2.2
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 2 2.0 1 2.3
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 3 2.8 1 2.5
  7. The natural resource endowment* 5 2.3 5 2.3
  8. Profitability* 3 3.1 1 3.0
  9. Regional integration 2 4.3 2 4.3
 10. Proximity to markets 4 4.3 3 3.6
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 3 3.6 2 3.6
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 2 3.1 2 3.3
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 2 2.9 1 3.1
  4. Promotion of competition 1 2.6 1 2.8
  5. Protection of intellectual property 2 2.9 1 3.1
  6. Price controls 3 3.8 2 3.6
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 1 2.3 1 2.4
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 2 3.0 1 2.8
  9. Minority shareholders 2 2.8 2 3.1
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 2 3.5 1 3.1
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 2 3.4 1 3.3
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 2 3.9 1 3.8
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 2 3.6 1 3.4
  5. Government favouritism 2 2.9 1 2.8
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 4 4.2 1 4.0
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 2 3.9 3 4.1
  3. Ease of trading* 3 3.5 2 3.4
  4. Openness of trade* 4 4.4 4 4.3
  5. Restrictions on the current account 5 4.7 2 4.6
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 5 4.8 4 4.8
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 5 4.7 5 4.8
  3. Value-added tax* 3 2.5 3 2.6
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 2 2.5 2 2.6
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 2 2.4 2 2.9
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 2 2.6 2 3.2
  7. Tax complexity 2 2.9 2 3.1
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 2 2.8 2 3.3
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 3 2.6 2 2.9
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 4 3.4 3 3.6
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 2 3.3 2 3.4
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 3 3.4 1 3.5
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 2 2.7 2 3.0
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 5 4.1 5 4.3
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 4 3.6 5 4.3
  3. Quality of workforce* 3 2.9 2 3.1
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 3 3.0 3 3.1
  5. Health of the workforce* 3 3.9 3 4.1
  6. Level of technical skills 4 3.5 3 3.4
  7. Cost of living* 2 3.8 4 3.6
  8. Incidence of strikes* 4 3.9 3 3.8
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 4 3.2 3 3.3
 10. Extent of wage regulation 3 3.0 2 2.9
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 3 3.4 2 3.1
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 2 4.4 4 4.4
  2. Broadband connection speed* 4 4.1 4 4.3
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 2 2.8 2 3.1
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 3 3.1 3 3.6
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 3 3.4 4 3.9
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 3 3.3 3 3.4
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 3 3.3 2 3.6
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 2 2.8 2 3.4
  9. Rents of office space* 1 3.0 1 2.6
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 4 2.8 2 2.7
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 3 4.3 4 4.2
  3. Scope of e-government* 4 3.6 3 3.8
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 3 4.1 4 3.9
  5. Internet use* 4 3.9 5 4.6
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 5 2.6 5 2.9
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 4 3.1 3 3.2
  8. Research infrastructure* 4 3.3 4 3.3
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 16 countries: Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine.

Subject: Tax rates; Corporate taxes; Constitutions; Authoritarianism; Exports; Trends; Foreign exchange rates; Politics; Income taxes; Sanctions; Productivity; Foreign investment; Consumption; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Presidents; Population growth; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Labor market

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Corporate taxes Exports Foreign exchange rates Income taxes Sanctions Productivity Foreign investment Consumption International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Labor market; Industry: 92111 :‎ Executive Offices

Location: Russia; Eastern Europe

People: Putin, Vladimir

Classification: 92111: Executive Offices

Identifier / keyword: Russia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Forecast Russia July 2022

Publication title: Country Forecast. Russia; New York

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jul 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 13518720

e-ISSN: 20489609

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Statistics, Country Report

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2714191742

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-russia-july-2022/docview/2714191742/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Pakistan July 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-pakistan-july-2022/docview/2714191241/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Economic outlook 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 6.5 6.2 3.7 3.2 5.5 6.8 Consumer price inflation (av, %) 9.5 18.5 9.6 6.0 4.1 3.7 Budget balance (% of GDP) -6.1 -6.9 -5.4 -5.0 -6.1 -5.8 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.5 -5.1 -4.8 -5.3 -3.4 -2.4 3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 7.6 12.2 15.1 13.3 12.2 9.4 Exchange rate PRs:US$ (av) 162.9 191.8 202.3 206.3 210.5 216.3 Real GDP will grow by an annual average of 4.8% in fiscal years 2022/23-2025/26 (July-June). Fact sheet Annual data 2021a Historical averages (%) 2017-21 Population (m) 225.2 Population growth 2.0 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 348.3b Real GDP growth 3.6 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 1,348.9b Real domestic demand growth 4.4 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,546 Inflation 7.7 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 5,990 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.3 Exchange rate (av) PRs:US$ 162.9b FDI inflows (% of GDP) 0.6 a EIU estimates. b Actual. Pakistan faces an acute imbalance on its fiscal and external accounts. [...]the country is reliant on the IMF and bilateral donors for fiscal and foreign-exchange reserve support. According to the IMF, merchandise exports stood at US$29.1bn in 2021, while imports totalled US$66.6bn, yielding a goods trade deficit of US$37.5bn.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Pakistan&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Pakistan+July+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-07-15&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Pakistan&amp;rft.issn=09668888&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - The ruling coalition, led by Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz), or PML (N), commands a thin majority with 177 seats in the lower house of parliament, out of a total 342 seats. EIU expects the government to serve out its term till mid-2023, although there is a small possibility of fresh elections being held earlier. Large-scale protests due to persistently high inflation and significant taxation burden also pose a threat to political stability. The military will play a dominant role in the country's politics, particularly on issues relating to domestic security and foreign policy. The precarious security situation will remain a source of instability during our forecast period (2022-26). Despite strained ties with India, we do not forecast an outright military conflict. China will remain Pakistan's main strategic and economic partner throughout the forecast period.

Pakistan--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.51 4.65 73 73 17 17
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.

- Pakistan's business environment will modestly improve from the historical period (2017-21), with the overall score increasing from 4.51 to 4.65 in 2022-26. However, it remains in the last place among the 17 countries rated in the Asia-Pacific region and at 73rd place globally, owing to improvements elsewhere. Macroeconomic imbalances, an unpredictable tax regime, concerns about corruption and weak institutional capacity will continue to undermine the business environment. However, less stringent regulation and price controls, strong development of e-commerce and efforts to expand infrastructure with support from China will help to underpin business sentiment.

Pakistan--highlights: Economic outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 6.5 6.2 3.7 3.2 5.5 6.8
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 9.5 18.5 9.6 6.0 4.1 3.7
Budget balance (% of GDP) -6.1 -6.9 -5.4 -5.0 -6.1 -5.8
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.5 -5.1 -4.8 -5.3 -3.4 -2.4
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 7.6 12.2 15.1 13.3 12.2 9.4
Exchange rate PRs:US$ (av) 162.9 191.8 202.3 206.3 210.5 216.3

- Real GDP will grow by an annual average of 4.8% in fiscal years 2022/23-2025/26 (July-June). The government will make efforts to rein in the fiscal deficit to adhere to the terms of a US$8bn IMF programme, while tighter monetary policy will also weigh on economic growth over 2022-23. However, significant rate cuts expected from 2024 will help to lift growth momentum. Pakistan will continue to require bilateral and multilateral loans to stave off a liquidity crisis. The twin deficits on the current and fiscal accounts will pose persistent macroeconomic risks, and sour investor appetite for Pakistani assets during the forecast period.

Pakistan--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2016 2021 2026
Total 203.6 225.2 246.4
 Male 104.8 115.9 126.8
 Female 98.8 109.3 119.7
Period averages (%)   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth   2.0 1.8
Working-age population growth   2.5 2.3
Labour force growth   2.4 2.4

- Pakistan's population will approach the 230m mark by the end of 2022 and will continue to rise, putting additional pressure on scarce resources. The rate of expansion in the working-age population will outpace overall population growth. Rapid urbanisation will provide an opportunity for increased economic output, but productivity growth will remain sluggish. We expect that Pakistan will be unable to benefit fully from its "demographic dividend", owing to low female participation rates and weak investment in education. The government will have only limited ability to generate jobs for the growing workforce.

Pakistan--highlights: Market opportunities   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 348.3 377.7 378.3 398.0 423.7 452.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 1,546 1,646 1,618 1,672 1,749 1,836
Household consumption (US$ bn) 286.9 322.0 314.5 333.6 356.6 382.1
Household consumption per head (US$) 1,270 1,400 1,350 1,400 1,470 1,550

- GDP per head at market exchange rates rose to US$1,546 in 2020/21 after two successive years of decline to US$1,360 in 2019/20 triggered by the pandemic and macroeconomic imbalances. GDP per head is forecast to rise in 2021/22, but fall mildly in 2022/23 as growth slows. Thereafter, GDP per head will rise till 2025/26 as growth momentum builds. Pakistan's low level of development means that food will still account for a large share of consumer expenditure in 2022-26. Wide regional income differences mean that demand for big-ticket consumer goods and luxury items will be concentrated in urban areas.

Pakistan--highlights: Long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 3.4 2.9 3.0
Growth of real GDP 5.2 4.2 4.5
Labour productivity growth 2.2 2.5 2.4

- We forecast the population to grow from 221m in 2020 to about 338m by 2050. In theory, demographic trends will be conducive to rapid GDP growth, but inadequate infrastructure, education, training of workers and other social services means that workforce productivity growth will be lower than its human capital endowment would suggest. The institutional and policy outlook will remain highly volatile, given the strong role of the armed forces. Fiscal constraints and priority of defence spending have already impaired budgeted development spending in 2022/23, and this trend is likely to continue over the forecast period. Strong ties with China will help to address some infrastructure challenges, although increased religious attacks on Chinese nationals can slow the progress.

Fact sheet Annual data 2021 a Historical averages (%) 2017-21
Population (m) 225.2 Population growth 2.0
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 348.3 b Real GDP growth 3.6
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 1,348.9 b Real domestic demand growth 4.4
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,546 Inflation 7.7
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 5,990 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.3
Exchange rate (av) PRs:US$ 162.9 b FDI inflows (% of GDP) 0.6
a EIU estimates. b Actual.
Background: The Islamic Republic of Pakistan was founded in 1947. East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) seceded in 1971. There have been several coups since independence. The most recent was in 1999, when the chief of army staff, Pervez Musharraf, became the chief executive of Pakistan. He ruled first as chief executive and then as president until 2008. The general election in 2008 resulted in a coalition government, led by the Pakistan People's Party (PPP). Pakistan witnessed the second transition between elected governments in 2018, as a new coalition government led by the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI), under the leadership of Imran Khan took office. In April 2022 Pakistan saw yet another leadership change, when the coalition led by the Pakistan Muslim Leage (Nawaz), or PML (N), led by Shehbaz Sharif, ousted the PTI coalition from power after the latter lost a no-confidence vote.
Political structure: Parliamentary supremacy over the presidency was restored in 2010, when both houses of the legislature approved a landmark amendment to the constitution. The PML (N) and the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) dominate a coalition government that comprises independents and smaller parties. Provinces are represented in the National Assembly (the lower house of parliament) in proportion to the size of their respective populations. In the Senate (the upper house), all four provinces have equal representation. Senators serve a term of six years, and half of the seats in the upper house come up for re-election every three years.
Policy issues: Pakistan faces an acute imbalance on its fiscal and external accounts. Large outlays for defence expenditure and debt-servicing obligations have led to wide fiscal deficits, while the balance of payments is strained because of a large financing gap. Thus the country is reliant on the IMF and bilateral donors for fiscal and foreign-exchange reserve support.
Taxation: The standard rate of corporate tax is 29%. However, in June 2022 the government announced a one-time "super tax" ranging from 4% to 10% on several large-scale industries for a period of one year. This covers sectors like steel, cement, aviation, cars, banks and fertilisers, among others. In terms of indirect taxes, the general sales tax (GST) remains at 17%. Tax rates are unlikely to be lowered meaningfully over 2022-26, as the government seeks to stabilise fiscal imbalances.
Foreign trade: According to the IMF, merchandise exports stood at US$29.1bn in 2021, while imports totalled US$66.6bn, yielding a goods trade deficit of US$37.5bn.
Major exports 2021 a % of total Major imports 2021 a % of total
Knitwear 14.2 Petroleum products 10.9
Rice 8.3 Crude petroleum 6.6
Cotton cloth 7.3 Telecommunications 3.8
Cotton yarn 4.0 Palm oil 4.8
       
Leading markets 2021 b % of total Leading suppliers 2021 b % of total
US 21.5 China 28.5
China 10.7 UAE 10.1
UK 7.4 Indonesia 5.8
Germany 5.5 US 5.3
a State Bank of Pakistan. b IMF, DOTS.
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a bicameral legislature and Islam as the state religion. The National Assembly (the lower house of parliament) holds 342 seats and the Senate (the upper house) comprises 100 members. The Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz), or PML(N), leads the coalition government which took office in April 2022, after the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI)-led coalition government lost a vote of no-confidence. The ruling coalition government has a slim majority of 177 seats in the Assembly, and includes parties like Pakistan People's Party, Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal, Muttahida Qaumi Movement, Balochistan Awami Party, as well as a number of independents. The PML(N)-led coalition also holds an absolute majority in the Senate, with 66 out of 100 seats under the ruling coalition's control. However, the opposition PTI continues to be the largest single party in the Senate. Elections for half of the seats in the Senate are held every three years, with the most recent election being held in March 2021, and the next upper house election scheduled to be held in 2024.
The provincial assemblies of Pakistan each represent a very distinct political landscape. The government in Punjab, the country's most populous province, saw a change of guard in April 2022, when Hamza Shahbaz Sharif of the PML (N) took office as the chief minister after Usman Ahmed Khan Buzdar of the PTI was ousted, following the fall of the PTI government at the national level. However, due to a dispute on the degree of support enjoyed by Mr Sharif, the Supreme Court asked for fresh elections to be held in Punjab in July. The PML (N) has traditionally been the dominant political party in that state, with the incumbent prime minister, Shehbaz Sharif, having served as its chief minister multiple times. Balochistan is administered by the Balochistan Awami Party, an ally in the ruling coalition. The coalition government also controls the Sindh province, through the Pakistan People's Party (PPP), which has traditionally dominated the political landscape in Sindh, and continues to hold a majority in the provincial assembly. However, the PTI governs the province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
The president is chosen by an electoral college comprising the upper and lower houses of parliament and the four provincial assemblies. Arif Alvi, a founding member of the PTI, was elected as the 13th president of Pakistan in September 2018, for a five-year term. The presidency is a largely ceremonial post in Pakistan's parliamentary system, where power resides with the prime minister as head of the executive. Although the prime minister is responsible for most day-to-day decisions, the military is in de facto charge of national security and foreign policy. In particular, the armed forces drive the most important foreign-policy relationships-those with the US, China, India and Afghanistan. Shehbaz Sharif is likely to support stable civil-military relations, although the degree of military support that he enjoys remains to be seen, given the military's previous discomfort with the political dominance of the Sharif and Bhutto families, who are currently united in government. Additionally, Mr Sharif's older brother and a former prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, was ousted from power in a military coup in 1999 during one of his terms in office. However, EIU believes that relations between the civilian government and the armed forces will not be disruptive. Militant groups are also a significant force. The most important insurgent organisations are the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (also known as the Pakistani Taliban), an alliance of around a dozen militant groups that is unrelated to the Taliban in Afghanistan, and the Balochistan Liberation Army, a militant separatist group in that province. The government has generally tried and failed to broker lasting peace agreements with these outfits. Furthermore, there are Islamist political organisations such as the Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan (TLP), which periodically lead large-scale demonstrations and campaigns on religious issues.
Parliamentary forces, July 2022
(no. of seats in the lower house)
Party Seats
Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf 156
Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz) 84
Pakistan People's Party 56
Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal 15
Muttahida Qaumi Movement Pakistan 7
Pakistan Muslim League (Quaid-e-Azam) 5
Balochistan Awami Party 5
Balochistan National Party 4
Grand Democratic Alliance 3
Awami Muslim League Pakistan 1
Awami National Party 1
Jamhoori Wattan Party 1
Independents 4
Total 342
Source: National Assembly of Pakistan.
Political outlook: Political stability A new government took office in Pakistan in April 2022, after the former administration led by Imran Khan's Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) party lost a no-confidence motion in the National Assembly (the lower house of parliament). Shehbaz Sharif of the Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz), or PML (N) took office as the new prime minister. The current ruling coalition commands a thin majority, with 177 seats in the lower house of parliament, which has a total of 342 seats. We expect the government to serve out its term until mid-2023, though there is a small possibility of new elections being held earlier.
The government is unlikely to seek fresh elections, but this could happen if enough members defected to render the majority void. This is not our core forecast, but political stability is fragile. Dissension within the government is visible as the Pakistan People's Party (the second largest in the coalition) has expressed reservations about the practice of making decisions through circulation of summaries that are largely dictated by a PML (N) supremo, Nawaz Sharif, instead of holding regular cabinet meetings and consulting all coalition allies. The government is unlikely to survive a no-confidence motion if allies defect, and this would probably herald new elections.
Additionally, Shehbaz Sharif is currently facing a series of corruption cases that could render his position as prime minister untenable, although this is not our core forecast. The thin parliamentary majority will also make the enactment of legislation difficult. These factors keep the threat to political stability elevated.
Political stability will also face challenges from Islamist groups such as the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP, also known as the Pakistani Taliban), as well as a separatist movement in Balochistan. Any truce agreement is unlikely to last, and we expect that the security situation will remain fragile. Increased attacks on non-nationals, as well as demonstrations on religious issues are expected to recur during our forecast period (2022-26).
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness Democratic norms are far from entrenched in Pakistan. In July 2018 the country witnessed only the second transfer of power between elected civilian governments in its 71-year history. Following this, although a change in government happened in April 2022, it was on the back of a loss of parliamentary majority for the ruling coalition rather than due to an elected government change. Further, the incumbent coalition led by the PML (N) has communicated its decision to continue in government without holding general elections till the term of the legislature expires in mid-2023. Parliamentary elections, when they do take place, are often marred by a number of irregularities, including vote-rigging, as well as a lack of judicial impartiality. The country's political institutions remain weak and underdeveloped. Moreover, inefficient government bureaucracy and corruption will continue to undermine institutional effectiveness. The military's power remains strong, and it will continue to assert itself in a number of policy areas-not only security and foreign policy, but also economic policies such as the privatisation of state-owned enterprises.
Political effectiveness varies greatly from region to region. In the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, which is governed by the opposition PTI, moves to increase the writ of government have often triggered conflict. In addition, secessionist elements have increasingly become active in Balochistan, targeting infrastructure projects. Conflicts between the provincial and federal governments over power-sharing (and, crucially, revenue-sharing) remain intense.
The judiciary does not have a history of impartiality, having traditionally deferred to the interests of the armed forces. It has, for example, retroactively ratified all of the country's military coups. The judiciary is highly politicised and some of its high-profile members have been overtly pro-government. There have been instances of the judiciary asserting its independence, as it did in April 2022, when it deemed the sudden dissolution of the Assembly under the Imran Khan-led PTI government as unconstitutional and ruled that a vote of no-confidence could be launched against Mr Khan. However, we do not believe that the legal system is likely to become a genuine guardian of the constitution within the forecast period. Partisanship has often detracted from rather than aided political effectiveness.
Political outlook: Election watch The current parliamentary term expires in mid-2023. In May the PML (N) indicated its desire to serve out the remainder of the current term. However, the PTI-led opposition led by Mr Khan has been pushing for fresh elections to take place before then.
If elections are held in the second half of 2022, the result could be a hung assembly, as we believe that no party will be able to cobble together a commanding "majority. The PTI's loss of power reflected a decline in its popularity amid tax hikes and mismanagement of the economy during its four years in office. The ruling PML (N)-led coalition may not fare better, as ongoing austerity measures required as part of the IMF bailout package will challenge its popularity. Therefore, any election is likely to see frenzied negotiations among political parties to gain a slim majority in the aftermath of the vote.
The Pakistan military (including its intelligence wing) has a long history of political intervention. It is an influential power broker in the domestic political landscape and will play an active role behind the scenes to forge alliances, especially in the absence of a dominant political party.
Political outlook: International relations China will remain Pakistan's leading economic and strategic partner in 2022-26. Although Chinese lending related to the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) will continue throughout 2022-26, conditionality for financial support will be tightened amid concern over Pakistan's debt sustainability. However, strategic imperatives regarding the India-China rivalry will ensure that some Chinese assistance to Pakistan continues, even if on unfavourable terms, as seen in June 2022, when a consortium of Chinese state banks lent US$2.3bn to Pakistan. China has also been influential in nudging Pakistan to adhere to IMF-mandated measures in order to solve an ongoing financial crisis. Pakistan will continue to take a tough line against any local terrorist groups that target Chinese-backed infrastructure projects.
We do not expect a significant improvement in relations between India and Pakistan over 2022-26. The decades-long sovereignty dispute over Kashmir (where Pakistan and China are united in creating infrastructure) and India's concern about cross-border terrorism will keep ties strained. The Pakistani military's support for militant groups in Indian-controlled Kashmir raises the risk of terrorist activity by non-state actors, which would, in turn, spur covert military operations from India. However, we expect both sides' nuclear arsenals to act as a deterrent to full-blown military conflict.
The relationship between Pakistan and the US is likely to remain strained, especially as the US pivots towards increased interaction with India. Alienation from the US and its allies has spurred Pakistan to foster good relations with Russia, and Pakistan has refused to condemn the country for its invasion of Ukraine. Pakistan is still looking to finalise a deal with Russia to build a 1,100km gas pipeline (known as Pakistan Stream), which will transport liquefied natural gas (LNG) from the port of Karachi to northern Pakistan. Work on the US$2.5bn project is tentatively slated to begin in 2023, but we believe that this could be delayed.
Pakistan will support and engage with the Taliban to maintain its influence in Afghanistan, while continuing to use the Taliban's offices to negotiate truce talks with separatist organisations like the TTP. Regarding other Islamic nations, Pakistan's ties with Turkey will remain strong, while Pakistan will court Saudi Arabia and the UAE to gain bilateral financial aid.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
Overall position 4.51 4.65 73 73 17 17
Political environment 3.3 3.3 77 74 17 17
 Political stability 3.3 2.9 78 77 17 17
 Political effectiveness 3.3 3.6 72 71 16 17
Macroeconomic environment 4.4 4.4 77 77 17 16
Market opportunities 5.0 5.5 47 54 14 15
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 4.0 4.8 66 63 14 13
Policy towards foreign investment 6.0 6.0 54 57 10 11
Foreign trade & exchange controls 4.6 5.1 74 73 17 17
Taxes 5.7 5.1 50 73 12 17
Financing 5.5 5.5 54 64 11 16
The labour market 5.1 5.1 73 75 17 17
Infrastructure 3.8 4.3 70 76 13 16
Technological readiness 2.4 2.4 80 79 17 17
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Pakistan's business environment will change significantly during the forecast period, with its overall score improving marginally from 4.51 in 2017-21 to 4.65 in 2022-26. Although it will remain ranked 73rd globally, it will also remain bottom-ranked regionally at 17th place. The divergent interests of various parties in the coalition government, coupled with the outsized political power of the military, make any meaningful business reforms unlikely. An inefficient bureaucracy will further limit political effectiveness, and geopolitical tensions with neighbouring India will keep political and security risks elevated. The government will continue the gradual liberalisation of rules on foreign investment, in an effort to offset investor concern, but progress on this will be painfully slow owing to vested interest among political groups and the military.
The operating environment will remain difficult in 2021-25 However, continued balance-of-payments strains mean that most bureaucratic obstacles and foreign-exchange controls will remain in place, impeding foreign trade and capital transfers. The resumption of an IMF programme in the latter half of 2022 will stabilise the economy, but payment strains will persist intermittently owing to poor economic policies. Corruption and tax evasion, often abetted by revenue officials, will remain widespread. The government will continue to expand ties with China and boost bilateral trade and investment. Projects under the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) will shift slowly from energy and infrastructure to industrial investment. Levels of internet and mobile-phone penetration will continue to improve, but Pakistan's technological readiness will remain poor by global standards. The country's research-and-development spending will also remain low.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Pakistan's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: A high degree of political instability makes reforms on privatisation and deregulation difficult.
2024-26: Private companies increase their share of the economy. Major cartels continue to operate, deterring competition.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: The government promotes foreign investment in some sectors, especially infrastructure and energy. However, security and political risks and the fragility of the economy deter inward investment.
2024-26: The government makes some progress in setting up special economic zones under the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor. However, the poor business environment hinders efforts to attract non-Chinese investment to these zones.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: The State Bank of Pakistan (the central bank) continues to operate a lightly managed exchange-rate regime.
2024-26: Officials relax some import controls that were introduced to ease pressure on the external account.
Taxes 2022-23: The corporate tax rate is raised to 39% for most major industries. Corporate tax exemptions are rolled back. Indirect taxes, especially import duties on high-value items, are raised to support central-government revenue.
2024-26: The corporate tax rate is lowered back to 29%, which is still high by regional standards. The tax system remains complex and inefficient. Most citizens remain outside the tax net.
Financing 2022-23: The cost of credit increases as monetary policy tightens further. Lending is constrained by risk-averse banks, owing to high levels of non-performing loans.
2024-26: Stock markets become important as a funding channel for medium and large companies as the external sector stabilises and attracts foreign capital.
The labour market 2022-23: The unemployment rate declines gradually but nevertheless remains high, keeping a lid on wage inflation.
2024-26: The low literacy rate and limited spending on tertiary education hamper growth in the supply of skilled labour.
Infrastructure 2022-23: The Chaman-Quetta-Karachi motorway and some other road projects are completed. The Main Line 1 railway project, which aims to upgrade the country's existing rail infrastructure, is delayed.
2024-26: Renewable energy power plants are built. Telecommunications infrastructure improves, but at a slow pace.
Technological readiness 2022-23: Spending on research and development remains depressed, as a result of adverse economic conditions.
2024-26: The government rolls out 5G spectrum but network coverage is scant, limiting demand for compatible products.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.4 4.4 77 77 17 16
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Pakistan's macroeconomic environment score will remain unchanged at 4.4 in 2022-26, and the country will remain ranked at 77th globally. However, it will rise by one place to 16th regionally, as Sri Lanka slips to the bottom of the regional ranking. After growing by 6.2% in 2021/22 (July-June), real GDP growth will slow considerably to 3.7% in 2022/23. Twin deficits on the current and fiscal accounts will dampen both investment and aggregate demand. Access to the US$8bn IMF programme over 2022-23 will help to stabilise balance-of-payment strains, but these will remain under stress owing to debt repayments and import payments. The current-account deficit will narrow from 5.1% of GDP in 2022 to an average of 4.1% of GDP over 2023-26, as exports improve and global commodity prices moderate.

- In 2022-23 Pakistan's external sector strains will be partially mitigated by support from the existing IMF programme. However, the country's precarious financial situation will worsen intermittently if global commodity prices rise or when import controls are removed after 2023. A persistent trade deficit and high levels of public debt will compound balance-of-payment stress. Additionally, the end of the IMF programme will again create payment difficulties for Pakistan, and the country will continue to resort to bilateral aid and commercial sovereign financing. These arrangements will help it to continue to service foreign debt in 2022-26, although the risk of a sovereign default remains high. Pakistan's foreign-exchange reserves will remain under pressure, leading to a progressive weakening of the currency over the forecast period. Inflationary pressures will accelerate sharply in 2022 owing to elevated global commodity prices, coupled with increased taxation, before they moderate over 2023-26. In the face of large debt-servicing obligations and high defence expenditure, the fiscal deficit will remain wide, averaging 5.6% of GDP in fiscal years 2022/23-2025/26 (July-June), limiting the government's ability to deliver on further development and social spending.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.0 4.8 66 63 14 13
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Pakistan will improve in the policy towards private enterprise and competition category, with its score increasing from 4 to 4.8 in 2022-26; its global rank rises from 66th to 63rd, and from 14th to 13th regionally. Easier government regulation and fewer price controls will support business competition. Gradual progress on business environment reforms and the growth of e-commerce will facilitate greater competition and new entrants to the market over the forecast period. However, an inefficient and largely corrupt bureaucracy will continue to be a major hurdle to private investment. Most of our gauges of Pakistan's policy towards private enterprise and competition will continue to rank below the regional average, as public entities and powerful cartels will continue to dominate key sectors over the forecast period. However, extensive lobbying and the stranglehold of the military in many sectors will stifle business sentiment.
The economy will slowly open up, but special interest groups will remain
- The government will struggle to make significant progress on privatisation of loss-making state-owned enterprises (SOEs), given limited private investor interest. Two major sources of drain on the exchequer are Pakistan International Airlines and Pakistan Steel Mills, whose workforces were downsized in 2020 as a first step towards their eventual sale. There are plans to open up the liquefied natural gas (LNG) import sector, which is expected to grow robustly in 2022-26, to private players. However, resistance from state monopolies in the energy sector and an inefficient bureaucracy will impede this process. Overall, bloated SOEs, particularly in the fuel and power sectors, will remain difficult to turn around or privatise owing to large financial liabilities and poor management. Heavy government involvement in the agriculture sector will continue, as it sets prices for wheat (the main staple crop) and influences retail prices of fresh produce.
- The Competition Commission of Pakistan is the national quasi-regulatory body tasked with preventing monopolistic practices, though its decisions are regularly held up in legal wrangles. Its overall effectiveness is limited, and unfair business practices in the private sector will remain common in 2022-26. Although Pakistan in theory boasts a favourable legal environment for private enterprise, in practice it is hampered by weak contract enforcement, an inefficient bureaucracy, burdensome regulations and policy uncertainty. Chinese investors and companies are likely to continue to receive favourable treatment from the government over the forecast period, in particular for the awarding of contracts, reducing opportunities for other businesses.

The military will continue to exert its influence in real estate and logistics
- The military will retain a significant influence on the economy in 2022-26. It will maintain large monopolies particularly in real estate and logistics. Additionally, the armed forces' pension funds will continue to play a prominent role in the economy through ownership or shareholdings in industries ranging from cereals to banking. Apart from the military, politically connected business groups such as textiles exporters will continue to exercise undue market influence and receive frequent subsidies. As a result, the freedom of most companies to compete openly will remain constrained.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.0 6.0 54 57 10 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Pakistan's score for policy towards foreign investment remains unchanged in 2022-26, but the country will drop by three places to 57th place in the global ranking and by one place to 11th regionally, owing to improvements in other countries. The influence of special interest groups and frequent corruption in the award of public-sector contracts will remain the main reason behind the weak investment climate. In addition, the risk of expropriation will remain high for foreign investors, with limited legal recourse in domestic courts and the absence of an effective dispute resolution mechanism. Although foreign investors are allowed to hold 100% equity in nearly all industrial sectors without prior permission, foreign direct investment is likely to remain comparatively low because of extensive regulatory red tape in setting up businesses, an uncertain taxation regime and potential obstacles to repatriation of profits.

- The forecast period will see ongoing economic co-operation with China, based around the ambitious CPEC project aiming to link China's Xinjiang region with the Arabian Sea at Gwadar Port. China has pledged to invest more than US$60bn over 15 years, focused on energy and road and rail infrastructure, with most projects planned to be completed by 2030. By the end of 2021 about US$25bn had been invested in projects related to power generation, transport infrastructure and the development of Gwadar Port. CPEC-related investments will continue to be financed partially by the Chinese state and its banks, which lend money to Chinese companies to carry out the work, often with imported Chinese labour. Pakistan will seek to diversify its sources of foreign investment, such as by engaging Saudi Arabia, but will achieve limited success in this.

Foreign investment will be deterred by bureaucratic controls
- Over the forecast period foreign investment is likely to remain concentrated in the energy, finance, and telecommunications sectors and dominated by China. Nevertheless, there will still be opportunities for non-Chinese investors. After the government's approval of the country's first five-year electric vehicle policy in 2020, this is likely to be another area of future opportunity. In March 2022 Barrick Gold Corporation and the Pakistani government settled a lingering dispute since 2011, potentially paving the way for commercial mining of one of the world's largest undeveloped open pit copper and gold deposits at Reko Diq, in Balochistan province. The government will continue efforts to mobilise investment from Saudi Arabia in the petroleum refining sector, with projects to be set up around the Gwadar port. Kuwait has also expressed interest in investing in Pakistan, and two Kuwaiti entities applied for a digital banking license in 2022.
- The government will try to encourage investors to use the country as a base for international manufacturers to produce goods for export in 2022-26, through nine planned special economic zones (SEZs), which constitute one component of the CPEC initiative. While the government plans to offer streamlined investment facilitation procedures and tax breaks to attract foreign investors to these SEZs, none of them has been made operational so far. In the budget for 2022/23, the government announced the intention of making SEZs in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Lahore and Sindh operational as soon as possible, although this is likely to occur towards the end of our forecast period. However, a relatively low-skilled labour force, high energy costs, and a poor overall business environment will limit the level of investment received by manufacturing in the forecast period. Foreign investment outside the SEZ framework mainly originates from China. Challenge Fashion, a private Chinese textiles manufacturer, set up facilities in Pakistan in 2021, with a plan to invest US$150m over three years.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.6 5.1 74 73 17 17
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Pakistan's global ranking for foreign trade and exchange controls will improve slightly in 2022-26, from 74th to 73rd place, but it will remain at the bottom regionally. While the score for the openness to trade sub-indicator will improve over the forecast period, it will remain below the regional average. Pakistan has lowered tariffs since it joined the World Trade Organisation in 1995. According to the World Bank, the average weighted tariff came down from 20.6% in 2001 to its lowest level of 8.7% in 2020. Nevertheless, taxes on imports, particularly on petroleum products, will remain a vital source of revenue for the government and are subject to frequent revision. We expect the government to make some progress in reducing non-tariff barriers. Nevertheless, non-tariff barriers in general, occasional import bans and restrictions in response to balance-of-payments pressure, inconsistent regulations and opaque policymaking will remain significant hurdles to international trade over the forecast period.
Exports will continue to be dominated by textiles, which will account for more than half of overall export receipts. Pakistan has found it difficult to diversify exports away from the sector. Textiles exports largely comprise lower-value items such as cotton cloth rather than higher-value items such as garments. Pakistan's complex and inconsistent regulations, inefficient bureaucracy and infrastructure bottlenecks will be reformed only slowly and will feed into relatively high business costs. One bright spot will be the export of information communication technology (ICT)-related services, which has grown rapidly (albeit from a low base) in recent years, and is likely to continue doing so in 2022-26.

- In 2022-23 export growth will moderate owing to a weak global demand and activity disruptions caused by power outages. Overall, exports in 2022-26 will be aided by the elimination of duties by China on 313 products from Pakistan, which took effect in 2020, as well as by continued duty-free access to Europe for Pakistani textiles. While Pakistan is working out free trade agreements with Turkey and Iran, we do not expect these to become fully operational during the forecast period.

Import growth will be constrained by lack of foreign exchange reserves
- Despite an economic recovery from the covid-19 pandemic, import growth will be constrained over 2022-23 by import bans on non-essential items, as well as a lack of foreign exchange to be able to pay for imports. We expect import curbs to be gradually lifted from 2024. Growth in imports will outstrip that for exports over the forecast period, leading to a persistent trade deficit. Partly as a result of this, capital controls on the cross-border movement of foreign exchange will remain relatively stringent over the forecast period, making financial operations awkward for foreign businesses.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.7 5.1 50 73 12 17
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Pakistan's score for taxes deteriorates sharply in 2022-26, falling from 5.7 to 5.1. Its global ranking therefore declines significantly from 50th to 73rd, while regionally it drops five places to the 17th place. Pakistan scores particularly poorly for tax complexity, and is below the regional average for most other indicators in this category. By contrast, its score for top marginal personal income tax is above the regional average. The slow pace of reform relative to other countries, frequent changes in tax policies as well as rates and retrospective taxation are among the main reasons for this deterioration. Overall, a lack of consistency in policy, patchy application and cumbersome legal procedures will remain the principal concerns for private enterprises over Pakistan's tax policy framework.

- In an effort to improve documentation and curb tax evasion over the forecast period, the Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) will continue to enhance its database of potential taxpayers and efforts to trace retail sales. One such measure introduced in 2022 aims to document the widespread small retail sector by imposing a fixed and final tax. Although this may force some tax evaders into compliance, we do not expect a widespread improvement in the efficiency of the FBR over the forecast period. Overall, these policy measures are likely to lead to some improvement in tax collection. However, we do not expect meaningful reform of the agency. Apart from inefficiency and corruption, it suffers from frequent changes in leadership and political interference, hampering institutional autonomy.

The government will focus on higher taxation of the rich to raise revenues
- In the budget for fiscal year 2022/23, the taxable threshold for salaried individuals has been reduced to increase income tax collection, and the rate of general sales tax has been kept at 17%. A "super tax" has been imposed for 2022/23 on most major industries, which will push the maximum corporate tax rate from 29% to 39% for the year. These measures will dampen investment sentiment and lower economic growth. Taxes and levies on imported petroleum products-a major source of revenue-have been increased in 2022/23. In general, the government will continue to rely heavily on indirect means to expand revenue collection in 2022-26, but the tax/GDP ratio will remain low owing to a narrow tax base and relatively large informal economy. We expect increases in electricity and gas tariffs over the forecast period, as subsidies on them are phased out to limit the fiscal deficit. Agricultural income is unlikely to face taxation over the forecast period, while the politically connected real-estate sector will continue to be relatively lightly taxed. The tax burden will fall mainly on the largescale manufacturing, telecommunications and banking sectors. The rate of overall business taxation is likely to remain comparatively high during the forecast period.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.5 5.5 54 64 11 16
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
The score for Pakistan's financing environment will remain at 5.5 in 2022-26, but it will slip globally by ten places as other countries improve faster. Despite an economic recovery in 2021-22, banks' balance sheets are likely to deteriorate in 2022-23, as leverage issues crop up after forbearance due to the pandemic diminishes. Additionally, a sharp tightening of monetary policy will raise borrowing costs for businesses. Banks' profits margins will be squeezed in 2022-23, as they along with other major industries will get hit by an additional, one-time 10% "super tax". Commercial banks, mainly privately owned, will nevertheless remain the most important source of short-term credit in Pakistan, with overdrafts the principal form of short-term borrowing. Bank credit to fund the government's large fiscal deficit will continue to crowd out private-sector borrowing to some extent. Access to financing will improve gradually in the latter part of the forecast period as the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP, the central bank) loosens monetary policy. The score for stock market capitalisation will improve as investment into the stock market grows robustly, but it will remain below the regional average over the forecast period.

- Weaknesses in the legal framework, inefficient foreclosure processes, and a scarcity of information for assessing collateral quality and borrower creditworthiness will pose ongoing problems for banks over the forecast period. Nevertheless, bank credit to the private sector has increased gradually during the last decade, and is expected to maintain growth in 2022-26. The majority of this will remain directed at the large corporate sectors, leaving a funding gap for small and medium-sized industries in the absence of a vibrant financing ecosystem. The government's focus on low-cost housing finance is likely to result in an increase in banks' mortgage portfolios, albeit from a very low base.

Financing will favour large enterprises at the cost of smaller ones
- A dual system of Western and Islamic financing will remain in operation in 2022-26. A large section of the population views the Western interest-based banking system with suspicion, resulting in rapid growth in Islamic banking. By December 2021 the sector's assets amounted to 18.6% of the overall banking sector, according to the central bank. Nevertheless, deposit-taking and lending with interest by Western-style commercial banks will remain the dominant form of banking during the forecast period.
- Branchless-banking services, which use a combination of licensed agents and mobile devices, will continue to expand robustly in 2022-26 as mobile phone penetration rises. After the SBP issued regulatory guidelines allowing non-banking companies to issue electronic money (e-money) services in 2019, numerous financial technology companies have been given approval to provide such services. The government is using branchless banking to disburse certain payments, which will spur growth further. These developments are likely to help to promote financial inclusion among small businesses and the population at large, which remains low.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.1 5.1 73 75 17 17
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Pakistan has slipped by two places in its global rank related to labour markets for 2022-26, and remains the lowest-ranked regionally. The technical skills of the working population will improve over the forecast period, as tertiary education expands slowly, and training initiatives and vocational training are undertaken by the private sector. Similarly, a favourable regulatory regime will lead to less restrictive labour laws and wage controls. The overall score is boosted in particular by the low cost of labour and the low cost of living in comparison with other Asia-Pacific countries. However, despite the rise in Pakistan's workforce over the forecast period, low educational levels and marginal female participation in the labour force will keep productivity of labour low. Although education is considered a priority by aid donors and multilateral institutions, fiscal constraints mean that we expect only very slight growth in public healthcare and education expenditure by the government over the forecast period.

- The government will pursue modest measures aimed at raising the literacy rate, which stood at about 63% nationally in 2021-a level at which it has stagnated since 2015. The urban population has a much higher literacy rate compared with rural areas and supplies labour to the manufacturing and services sectors. There is a large gender divide in educational attainment, with the female literacy rate significantly lower than that for males. Coupled with religious conservatism, this translates into an extremely low participation rate for women in the labour force. The government is unlikely to prioritise primary and secondary schooling in 2022-26, partly because investment in tertiary education is more popular among the vocal urban elite. Consequently, the country will continue to have a mass of poorly educated people and a small percentage of well-educated elite, many of whom will emigrate.

Quality and productivity of labour will remain sub-par despite availability
- Pakistan will continue to face criticism over the use of child labour and bonded labour. Legislation passed to ban debt bondage in 1992 has failed to end the practice, owing largely to lacklustre enforcement and a large informal economy. Debt bondage is expected to remain prevalent in industries such as agriculture, brick-making, and carpet-weaving in particular. The International Labour Organisation describes the situation of child labour in the country as one of the worst in the world.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
3.8 4.3 70 76 13 16
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Power outages will remain a major hindrance to business operations Pakistan's infrastructure score will improve from 3.8 to 4.3 in 2022-26, following sustained investment in its road network, port infrastructure, electricity supply and mobile telecoms network. However, its global and regional ranks will slip as other countries improve faster. The reliability of electricity supply will remain a major cause for concern for businesses over the forecast period, as Pakistan's inefficient power sector is unlikely to be reformed. On the other hand, the main areas of improvement will be mobile network coverage, broadband connection speed, the infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution, and the extent and quality of road network. This indicates that both digital and physical infrastructure will improve over the forecast period. Pakistan will continue to have some of the lowest office rents in the region. Nonetheless, its overall infrastructure, as it relates to enabling business, will remain relatively poor, owing to decades of underinvestment.

- The CPEC project will remain the cornerstone of efforts to modernise the transport, energy, and power sectors in 2022-26. The last leg of the US$3bn cross-country Peshawar-Karachi motorway in Sindh province (connecting Sukkur city to Karachi) expected to be finished by 2025. In the first half of the forecast period the government aims to add road construction projects for the underdeveloped Balochistan province under the CPEC umbrella. The development of Gwadar port, located strategically on the Arabia Sea in Balochistan, will remain a priority CPEC project. However, progress is likely to be slow because of fiscal constraints and the unclear commercial viability of the port. A large CPEC-related infrastructure project, the US$7.2bn upgrade of the Peshawar-Karachi railway line, is facing mounting fiscal and debt concerns. However, a mass transit rail project developed under the CPEC in the country's second-most populous city, Lahore, was successfully launched in 2020, and a similar project is under discussion for the largest city, Karachi.
- Over 2022-26 the government will make further efforts to improve the reliability of electricity supply. Imported liquefied natural gas (LNG) will increasingly replace domestic natural gas and furnace oil for power generation. Several coal-fired power projects under the CPEC, cumulatively able to generate 2,280 MW, are under construction and set to be completed towards the end of the forecast period. Nevertheless, the government intends to diversify generation through renewable sources as well, releasing a national policy for this purpose in 2020. Several hydropower projects are planned under the CPEC, the largest of which will be the 1,100-MW Kohala project slated for completion in 2026. The government will also deepen nuclear co-operation with China, despite opposition by the US and India. These initiatives will reduce electricity supply shortages over the forecast period, but the main challenge will remain the underfunded transmission and distribution segment. This has led to accumulating circular debt (the high inter-company arrears that delay payments through the electricity generation and supply chain), which is unlikely to be eliminated in 2022-26.
- Pakistan will face acute water shortages over the forecast period; it already has to deal with widespread seasonal shortages and chronic deficiencies in some urban areas, including the commercial capital, Karachi. The government will continue to prioritise the Diamer-Bhasha dam-a megaproject for both hydropower generation and water storage-to meet this challenge; a construction agreement was signed with a Chinese firm in May 2020. However, financing such large infrastructure projects will remain a challenge in 2022-26, owing to large fiscal deficits.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
2.4 2.4 80 79 17 17
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Digitalisation of government services will improve slowly Pakistan's score for technological readiness will remain unchanged, at 2.4, in 2022-26. It will rise one place globally, to 79th, but remain at bottom place (17th) in the Asia-Pacific region. The score for scope of e-government will rise (from a very low base) as government services are slowly digitised, but the country will remain below the regional average over the forecast period. The central bank is working on various projects to promote the digitalisation of government payments, and we expect more of these to be moved online during the forecast period. Pakistan will continue to lag far behind its regional peers in the areas of internet use and mobile-phone subscriptions, despite growth in both areas in 2022-26.

- Research-and-development spending in the private sector will remain extremely low during the forecast period, while the efforts of the Higher Education Commission to promote academic research and innovation will produce limited results because of low funding. However, defence-related research spending is likely to rise, driven by the demands of the armed forces, which are keen to modernise their systems and equipment. One example is the Centre for Aerospace and Security Studies, a think-tank linked to the military. This will occur against a backdrop of increasing co-operation in defence technology with China. A practical demonstration of this is the JF-17 Thunder fighter aircraft, developed jointly by Pakistan and China. While Nigeria became the first country to purchase the JF-17, export orders from other countries are likely during the forecast period.

The start-up environment will gradually mature with government policies
- Pakistan's e-commerce market has great potential, with the number of merchants and consumers expected to grow at a rapid rate in 2022-26. With Pakistan's first e-commerce policy having been approved in October 2019, we expect added momentum in the sector over the forecast period. The emergence of several online marketplaces and rising internet use have attracted the attention of foreign investors. For example, in May 2021 Facebook (US) announced co-investment plans with a Pakistani internet service provider to improve and expand the broadband fibre network. There has also been a rise in venture capital funding in start-ups looking to leverage growing internet coverage, with US$350mn reportedly invested in 2021. On the back of online sales growth, the logistics and delivery sector is also expected to expand and modernise. Overall, we expect e-commerce sales to grow steadily, although the limited availability of broadband internet outside the largest cities will be a constraint.

Economic forecast: Policy trends Pakistan is nearing mass vaccination (at least 60% of the population has been vaccinated), with 57.3% of the population fully vaccinated by end-June, and EIU does not expect further covid-19 outbreaks to meaningfully disrupt activity. However, the nation is not expected to be able to achieve mass booster-dose vaccination before early 2024.
The government's policy priority will be to implement austerity measures required under the IMF's ongoing US$8bn extended fund facility (EFF) programme, in order to ameliorate a precarious financial condition and ease balance-of-payment strains. The government will strive to accelerate privatisation of loss-making public sector enterprises, while working on increasing bilateral trade through agreements with countries like Turkey and Iran, although these developments are likely to materialise beyond our forecast horizon (2022-26).
Economic policymaking will be subject to military interference during the forecast period. The armed forces will expand their sphere of influence through appointments and institutional changes, which, in turn, will further entrench their business interests, to the detriment of Pakistan's economic structure. In particular, the logistics and transport sectors, which are dominated by military-backed entities, will undergo a further decline in competition. The armed forces' greater involvement in economic matters could also increase expropriation risks for foreign investors in the energy and extractive industries.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Government expenditure 18.5 20.5 19.5 20.4 20.1 19.8
Government revenue 12.4 13.6 14.1 15.4 14.0 14.0
Budget balance -6.1 -6.9 -5.4 -5.0 -6.1 -5.8
Government debt 58.2 55.6 54.9 56.3 58.0 58.8
The budget presented in June 2022 for fiscal year 2022/23 (July-June) focuses on fiscal consolidation through a variety of taxation measures and expenditure curtailment. The government has focused on taxing the wealthy, which will enable the government to garner increased income taxes in 2022/23, and we do not expect these measures to be rolled back in the next budget in 2023. The government has also imposed a super tax in addition to the standard corporate tax rate of 29% on some sectors, which will shore up corporate taxes while weakening investment over 2022/23. The government has also proposed a hefty petroleum levy in 2022/23, which will raise the cost of living substantially.
The expenditure budget is skewed towards a higher allocation for defence, while development expenditure has been pared. A few subsidy and cash transfer schemes have been given enhanced allocations, but none of them are meaningfully large, while the allocation for power subsidies has been significantly reduced.
The government's budgeted fiscal deficit stands at 4.9% of GDP for 2022/23, but we expect the government to show a higher deficit of 5.4% of GDP despite significant increase in corporate taxation, given lower GDP growth expectations. Nonetheless, this would be a significant consolidation from the fiscal deficit of 6.9% of GDP in 2021/22.
The budget deficit will narrow further in 2023/24 under the IMF's aegis, before some widening is visible over 2024/25 and 2025/26 after the term of the IMF loan expires, as the government is likely to roll back onerous import duties, wealth taxation and higher corporate taxes, as it faces resentment from the affluent sections of the population. The deficit will stand at an annual average of 5.6% of GDP in 2023/24-2025/26, keeping the public debt ratio elevated.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Money market interest rate 7.6 12.2 15.1 13.3 12.2 9.4
A worsening inflation outlook (resulting from escalating global commodity prices), a significant rundown of foreign-exchange reserves (due to a higher import bill and scheduled debt repayments) and an aggressive monetary policy tightening cycle by the Federal Reserve (Fed, the US central bank) will exacerbate capital outflows and weaken the Pakistan rupee over 2022. The State Bank of Pakistan (SBP, the central bank) will use increases in the policy rate to counteract such pressures, especially as foreign-exchange reserves are not sufficient to provide a buffer to support the depreciating currency.
The SBP has raised its policy rate by 525 basis points so far in 2022, and we expect the SBP to raise the policy rate by another 200 basis points before the end of the year. The 725-basis-point rise we expect this year follows increases of 275 basis points in 2021. As the Fed's tightening trajectory is expected to be significantly milder and inflation eases in 2023, we expect the SBP to tighten monetary policy by 50 basis points to maintain the rate differential with developed nations to attract debt market inflows from foreign investors, and support the currency. The tightening cycle is expected to stop in mid-2023, with the policy rate standing at 17.5%, which is the highest by historical standards.
We expect that the significant degree of tightening over 2021 and 2022 to slow consumption and investment sentiment from late 2022, as the lagged effect of higher rates sets in. Once the IMF programme concludes, the benign inflation trajectory and lack of pressure of rate hikes in the US will give the SBP comfort to stimulate growth by embarking on an aggressive easing cycle from the first half of 2024, with rate cuts over 2024-2026.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Economic growth (%)
US GDP 5.7 2.3 1.3 1.4 1.9 2.0
OECD GDP 5.2 2.5 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.9
World GDP 5.7 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.6
World trade 10.9 4.3 4.2 3.8 3.6 3.6
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 4.7 7.7 3.7 1.6 2.1 2.1
OECD CPI 3.6 7.8 3.8 2.4 2.3 2.2
Manufactures (measured in US$) 5.8 2.8 2.2 3.2 2.4 1.6
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 70.4 107.9 95.5 86.5 78.0 69.0
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 37.9 23.7 -6.1 -7.6 -4.2 -3.4
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.1 1.5 3.2 2.8 2.7 2.7
¥ 3-month money market rate (av; %) 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
¥:US$ (av) 109.77 126.26 131.70 129.58 121.55 117.75
PRs:US$ (av) 162.91 191.84 202.25 206.25 210.50 216.25
Economic forecast: Economic growth %; fiscal years ending Jun 30th 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP 6.5 6.2 3.7 3.2 5.5 6.8
Private consumption 9.4 10.1 4.4 4.3 6.8 7.2
Government consumption 1.8 -3.4 5.0 3.5 4.0 5.0
Gross fixed investment 4.5 2.5 5.0 4.6 6.0 6.4
Exports of goods & services 6.5 8.4 9.6 6.9 5.3 6.2
Imports of goods & services 14.5 15.6 4.8 10.1 8.6 7.3
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.1 0.1 -0.2 0.1 -0.2 0.1
Domestic demand 8.0 7.9 4.3 4.3 6.2 7.0
Agriculture 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.8 3.2 3.0
Industry 7.8 7.2 4.6 5.2 6.0 6.3
Services 6.0 6.2 4.2 2.6 6.2 7.7
We expect real GDP to expand by 3.7% in 2022/23 (July-June), decelerating from 6.2% in 2021/22. We expect the lagged effects of rate rises over 2021 and 2022 to dampen consumption and investment sentiment from late 2022, leading to muted growth. The deceleration will be led by lower private consumption due to sustained high inflation, which will erode consumer confidence and purchasing power. Remittances will help to offset some of these pressures, particularly in rural areas. External demand growth will also moderate owing to weaker growth in trading partners, such as China, the US and the Gulf economies. Growth will be supported by sustained investment (especially tied to CPEC projects), and some government spending impetus (especially on the defence sector) after a year of contraction.
Rate cuts and significantly weaker inflation pressures over 2025-26 will work to improve consumer and business sentiment, gradually lifting growth impulses. Growth will also benefit from investment by Chinese companies under the CPEC. Real GDP growth will average 5.2% per year in 2023/24-2025/26, with gradual acceleration. Growth will be supported by an improvement in the performance of agriculture and industry, while services will gradually show a stronger rebound, as consumer sentiment benefits from rate cuts.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends Output from the industrial sector accounted for 21.2% of nominal GDP in 2021/22. The manufacturing subcomponent accounts for two-thirds of the industrial sector, within which textiles will continue to play an important role and account for the majority of total merchandise exports. The budget for 2022/23 fulfilled a long-standing demand of the textile sector through a rationalisation of the tariff structure for synthetic filament yarn, which will make the sector more cost-competitive. Strong demand from Pakistan's export destinations should prop up growth for this sector over 2022/23.
Over the rest of the forecast period the textile sector will continue to expand, but the growth will be constrained by a number of factors. Garment companies have often failed to adapt to international clients' increasingly stringent requirements in areas such as labour rights. The sector is still stuck at the low end of the value chain, as modern management practices have not been widely utilised, resulting in low productivity. Moving up the value chain will be crucial, as Pakistan's textile sector is still based mainly on cotton, whereas international demand is shifting to synthetic fibre. Moreover, competitors such as Vietnam have made headway in signing free-trade agreements with Pakistan's key export destinations, which could curb growth prospects
Output from other subsectors of the industrial sector, such as furniture, wood products, cars, iron and steel products, machinery and chemical products is forecast to increase gradually. The construction sector will grow strongly in the first half of the forecast period, supported by regulatory easing, though increased taxation on real estate could deter investment activity when interest rates have already risen substantially in 2022. An improvement in the availability of electricity, particularly in the latter part of the forecast period, will reduce operational challenges, and firms will start to be able to take better advantage of preferential tariffs. However, the sector will continue to suffer from low levels of investment.
Services sector will remain a major contributor to GDP growth The services sector will be an increasingly important part of the economy over the forecast period, expanding from 58.2% of GDP in 2021/22 to 59.2% of GDP in 2025/26. Wholesale and retail trade is the largest category in the services sector, comprising around 20% of GDP. Rising household incomes and greater urbanisation will spur growth in retail. Infrastructure spending will provide a lift for the transport sector, which is set to benefit from improvements and investment under the CPEC. The government will aim to create better infrastructure in areas including energy, multipurpose dams, highways and seaports, while trying to make special economic zones in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Lahore and Sindh operational as soon as possible.
Output growth in the telecommunications sector is also likely to remain strong in 2022-26. Mobile-phone use is increasing rapidly, as a result of deregulation in the sector and lower prices for handsets. According to the Pakistan Telecommunications Authority, the percentage of people in Pakistan using mobile phones stood at 87.7% in May 2022, when there were 193m annual mobile subscribers; this is set to rise further in the coming years. Demand for 4G services has been strong, and these will enable many more people and businesses to access high-speed internet via mobile phones, spurring further expansion. The government is in the process of refining modalities for a 5G launch in the country. Moreover, opportunities for expansion exist in new areas such as broadband and mobile commerce. Most foreign investment will continue to come from China and the Middle East. As a significant proportion of foreign direct investment is concentrated in telecoms, maintaining the sector's attractiveness to foreign investors will remain crucial for the government.
Output from the agriculture sector (which accounts for 24.4% of nominal GDP and 36.9% of total employment) will fluctuate depending on government targets and seasonal rainfall. The sector is vulnerable to natural disasters like floods and locus infestations, as well as inadequate irrigation facilities. This will continue owing to inadequate investment, which is unlikely to be stepped up. Assuming normal harvests, we expect agricultural output to increase by 2.9% per year on average in 2022/23-2025/26.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Consumer prices 9.5 18.5 9.6 6.0 4.1 3.7
Consumer price inflation will remain elevated in 2022 owing to high fuel prices and imported inflationary pressures stemming from currency weakness. The government's lower budgeting for electricity subsidies, the higher petroleum levy and increased duties on a variety of items will contribute to higher consumer price inflation over 2022. Some resumption in demand will also prompt producers to pass on higher prices to consumers. We forecast that consumer prices will rise by an average of 18.5% this year.
Consumer price inflation will decelerate in 2023, reflecting the dissipation of domestic supply-side inflationary pressure and an easing of global oil and commodity prices, though it will still remain significantly high by historical standards. Overall, we expect consumer price inflation to average 5.9% per year in 2023-26.
Producer price inflation will significantly accelerate to 30.2% in 2022, from 18% in 2021, as a weak currency and high commodity prices lift input prices especially for metals, machinery and leather products. An easing of global commodity prices and the dissipation of supply-side pressures will cause producer price inflation to average 8% over 2023-26.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Exchange rate PRs:US$ (av) 162.91 191.84 202.25 206.25 210.50 216.25
Exchange rate PRs:US$ (end-period) 176.52 203.05 206.25 210.88 213.38 215.13
Exchange rate PRs:¥100 (av) 148.40 151.94 153.57 159.17 173.18 183.65
Real effective exchange-rate index (2010=100; av) 100.07 99.62 100.25 100.03 98.61 97.08
Purchasing power parity PRs:US$ (av) 41.36 44.09 46.33 47.45 47.88 48.19
The Pakistan rupee has lost value since the onset of 2022 in response to political and economic developments. Negative investor sentiment tied to the war in Ukraine, domestic political upheaval and uncertainty around the resumption of the IMF package soured investor sentiment and accelerated capital flight. Net foreign portfolio investment outflows totalled US$390m in January-May 2022, compared with an inflow of US$1.4bn in the five months before that.
Over the rest of 2022, worries about Pakistan's funding requirement will keep the domestic currency under significant pressure. We forecast that the rupee will stand at PRs203:US$1 at end-2022, compared with PRs176.5:US$1 per year earlier, and will average PRs191.8:US$1 over 2022, marking a depreciation of 15.1%. Foreign-exchange reserves are expected to improve to US$13.9bn by end-2022, from US$10.3bn at the beginning of July, as multilateral and bilateral funding supports accretion.
We expect the rupee to continue trending weaker over 2023-26 owing to Pakistan's large current-account deficit, relatively high inflation and the strengthening of the US dollar. Volatility in the exchange rate will continue, as the central bank will not be able to stem using the limited buffer of foreign-exchange reserves providing an average of 2.5 months of import coverage over 2023-26.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Current-account balance -12.3 -19.1 -18.0 -21.0 -14.5 -11.0
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.5 -5.1 -4.8 -5.3 -3.4 -2.4
Goods: exports fob 29.1 33.3 37.6 40.4 44.5 46.6
Goods: imports fob -66.6 -79.4 -87.1 -93.1 -93.8 -94.9
Trade balance -37.5 -46.1 -49.5 -52.7 -49.3 -48.3
Services: credit 6.5 6.6 7.4 7.7 8.0 8.3
Services: debit -9.8 -11.1 -12.2 -13.1 -13.8 -14.4
Services balance -3.3 -4.5 -4.9 -5.5 -5.8 -6.1
Primary income: credit 0.7 0.7 1.3 1.8 2.0 2.0
Primary income: debit -5.1 -6.2 -5.7 -7.5 -7.1 -7.5
Primary income balance -4.4 -5.4 -4.4 -5.8 -5.1 -5.5
Secondary income: credit 33.3 37.2 41.1 43.2 46.0 49.1
Secondary income: debit -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4
Secondary income balance 33.0 36.9 40.8 42.9 45.7 48.8
We forecast the current-account deficit to widen to 5.1% of GDP in 2022, from a contraction of 3.5% of GDP in 2021, driven by a larger goods trade deficit. Goods exports will rise more modestly than seen in 2021, as major trading partners of Pakistan will face slower growth owing to higher commodity prices and monetary tightening. Export growth will be led by sectors including rice, textiles, leather, footwear, engineering goods and gems.
The goods import bill will rise principally owing to price shocks. Higher commodity prices will be reflected in imported items like chemicals, raw cotton (for the garment industry), petroleum, machinery and edible oils. However, the effect of high prices will be partly offset by lower import volumes, as import of non-essential and luxury items are banned, while import volumes have also reduced owing to the inability to pay for imports given dwindling foreign-exchange reserves. Higher import duties on a range of imports will also discourage a pick-up in the same.
The current account will receive support from workers' remittances, which are expected to rise over 2022 as higher oil prices improve incomes of expat Pakistanis in the oil-dependent Gulf economies.
The current-account deficit will narrow in 2023-26, to average 4% of GDP, as goods exports gains momentum, and we expect import controls to be in place at least until end-2023. The challenges facing efforts to boost goods exports to their potential, resulting from myriad supply-side constraints (including the slow adoption of technology, low labour productivity and a difficult local business environment), suggest that the current account will remain in a structural deficit. The relaxation of import controls will buttress import growth in the medium term. Inflows will dwarf outflows, leaving the secondary account in surplus and partially offsetting the trade deficit. We expect Pakistan's external position to be manageable with help from bilateral and multilateral lenders.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Pakistan Stocks and flows Foreign direct investment (FDI) stood at US$2.1bn in 2021, according to data from the UN, rising mildly from US$2bn seen in 2020. Inflows remained relatively resilient during the covid-19 pandemic and the balance-of-payments strains faced by Pakistan due to an increase in investment from China. FDI is focused in sectors like energy, oil and gas exploration, electronics, telecommunications and information technology. The stock of FDI in Pakistan stood at US$32.9bn at end-2021, higher than the stock of US$21.6bn in the similarly sized Bangladeshi economy.
Origin and distribution In the first eleven months of 2021/22 (July 2021 to May 2022), the top net foreign investors in Pakistan were China (accounting for 23.5% of inflows), the Netherlands (12.2%) and Hong Kong (6.4%), according to the State Bank of Pakistan (the central bank). The power sector was the largest recipient of FDI in the same period, garnering 25.3% of total inflows, while the communications sector and oil and gas sector accounted for 12.7% and 8.2% of inflows respectively.
Determinants Between 2000 and 2007 the military government was able to maintain relative political and economic stability, and this was an important factor in attracting investment. Sustained growth in specific sectors since then has presented investors with the potential for high returns. However, the uncertain political environment since 2008, the recurrent balance-of-payments difficulties faced by Pakistan, low productivity of Pakistani labour and a high taxation environment have adversely affected investor confidence. A key source of investment finance is the Chinese government, which wants to foster political stability through investment in Pakistan's economic development. The prime example of this is the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC). However, increased attacks on Chinese nationals, as well as large outstanding debt owed to Chinese investors, have caused China to postpone new investment decisions.
Impact FDI into Pakistan has been unable to support fixed investment significantly, as inflows have been concentrated in only a few sectors, such as oil and gas exploration, power, telecommunications and finance. Overall, the longer-term benefit will be limited given that even in these sectors the transfer of technology between foreign companies and domestic companies is minimal. However, the impact of FDI on Pakistan will be felt mostly through investments made under the CPEC in the power sector, which will significantly support the Pakistani economy by alleviating the country's chronic electricity shortage. However, a majority of CPEC projects are running significantly behind schedule because of funding issues, and EIU believes that their completion will be continue to be delayed, given Pakistan's precarious debt repayment situation.
Potential The main attractions for foreign investors will continue to be the telecommunications, power and hydrocarbons sectors. The government will encourage private-sector involvement in areas that were previously the preserve of the public sector, primarily through privatisation. The government resumed its privatisation programme in mid-2014 with the sale of stakes in United Bank and Pakistan Petroleum, in order to shore up its fiscal position. The government also has a tentative plan for privatising energy companies and other loss-making public enterprises, to address circular debt flow and to reduce the size of the country's extant debt stock through disinvestment proceeds. This will benefit some businesses who could submit tenders for sectors dominated by government enterprises like energy and steel. Progress on privatisation over the forecast period will be slow, and the process of reforming public-sector companies will be gradual. This will make attracting buyers for these troubled entities a challenge. In general, political concerns have had a greater impact on portfolio inflows than FDI, but Pakistan's myriad domestic woes indicate that investment prospects (with the exception of projects under the CPEC) will remain relatively subdued.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2016 2021 2026
Population (m)
Total 203.6 225.2 246.4
 Male 104.8 115.9 126.8
 Female 98.8 109.3 119.7
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 37.3 35.6 33.6
 15-64 58.5 59.9 61.3
 65+ 4.2 4.6 5.1
Young-age dependency ratio 0.64 0.59 0.55
Old-age dependency ratio 0.07 0.08 0.08
Working-age population (m) 119.1 134.8 151.0
Urbanisation (% of total) 36.2 37.4 38.6
Labour force (m) 62.3 70.0 78.7
       
Period averages   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth (%)   2.0 1.8
Working-age population growth (%)   2.5 2.3
Labour force growth (%)   2.4 2.4
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   28.7 26.5
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   7.0 6.8
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   58.0 51.5
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   65.9 66.6
 Female   67.8 68.7
 Average   66.8 67.6
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; EIU estimates and forecasts; national statistics.
Population growth will put increasing pressure on scarce resources EIU forecasts that the population will grow by 1.8% per year in 2022-26-a slight deceleration from 2% recorded in 2017-21. Nevertheless, Pakistan will add 21m people to its population over the forecast period. Population growth will put increasing pressure on scarce resources such as water and energy. The Water and Power Development Authority forecasts that the amount of water available will fall to about 800 cu metres/person by 2025, compared with about 1,040 cu metres/person in 2021 and about 5,000 cu metres/person in 1951. (The UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation considers a level of 1,000 cu metres per person to be the threshold below which a country faces water scarcity.)
The government hopes to slow population growth and plans to encourage medical practitioners, religious leaders and private organisations to work with it to reduce the birth rate. Officials also intend to focus on slowing population growth in rural areas, where about 60% of Pakistan's citizens live. However, previous family-planning campaigns have not been markedly successful, and a plethora of other pressing issues including easing the strains on the fiscal and external accounts means that population control will not be a priority over the medium term.
The demographic distribution will favour the young. While the proportion of people aged up to 14 will shrink, that of people aged between 15 and 64 is projected to grow over the next five years. The proportion of the total in the oldest group (those aged 65 or over) will rise slightly. Although the number of Pakistani people of working age will increase during our five-year forecast period, the pace of this growth will be lower than that seen over 2017-21, in line with trends for developing countries as overall population growth slows. The growing workforce will ensure that Pakistan enjoys a "demographic dividend" as the higher level of output facilitated by the increased labour force supports stronger overall economic growth. Moreover, Pakistan will not have to combat the financial problems associated with an ageing population (in particular, higher medical costs and pension liabilities) over the next two decades.
However, Pakistan will not be able to reap the full potential benefits of its demographic dividend because of persistently low productivity of the workforce, lack of education and training initiatives and low female participation in the workforce due to social and religious restrictions. According to the International Labour Organisation, only 21% of women in Pakistan participated in the labour force in 2019, and this number is likely to have fallen further since the onset of the pandemic in 2020. This is lower than the global average and is behind Pakistan's regional peers, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, where 36% and 34% of women were in employment respectively.
Barriers to entry in the education system will persist Unlike Bangladesh, Pakistan has not made significant progress on reducing barriers to entry in the education system. According to data provided by the UN, the gender difference in primary school completion is wide in Pakistan, as 64% of boys completed their education in 2019 (latest available data), while only 56% of girls did the same. There is also a wide discrepancy between the poor and the rich; only 28% of all children in the poorest quintile completed primary school in 2018, compared with 92% for the richest quintile. Progress in the improvement of education will be slow, partly because Pakistan lacks qualified teachers. Those teachers who are qualified are unlikely to find employment in rural or poor areas an attractive proposition.
Despite the weakness of its key social indicators, development spending will remain less of a priority than debt repayment and military spending. As a result, we expect social indicators in areas such as health and education to remain poor. We expect that life expectancy will rise slowly, from an average of 66.8 years in 2021-25 to 67.6 years in 2022-26. The relatively fast rate of population growth will put increasing strain on the provision of healthcare services, especially as government expenditure on health will continue to be slashed after the covid-19 pandemic.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Population (m) 225.2 229.5 233.8 238.0 242.2 246.4
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 348.3 377.7 378.3 398.0 423.7 452.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 1,546 1,646 1,618 1,672 1,749 1,836
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 1,348.9 1,518.3 1,631.3 1,713.2 1,845.3 2,012.0
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 5,990 6,616 6,978 7,198 7,618 8,164
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 282.1 297.5 290.9 303.1 324.8 357.8
Median household income (US$) 6,222 7,292 7,305 7,528 7,946 8,564
Household consumption (US$ bn) 286.9 322.0 314.5 333.6 356.6 382.1
Household consumption per head (US$) 1,270 1,400 1,350 1,400 1,470 1,550
Exports of goods & services (% change) 6.5 8.4 9.6 6.9 5.3 6.2
Imports of goods & services (% change) 14.5 15.6 4.8 10.1 8.6 7.3
Remittance income will act as a major support to consumption The consumer market, in which there was a fall in income in 2020-21, has been further affected by accelerating consumer price inflation over 2022. The government's efforts to address balance-of-payments pressures and consolidate fiscal expenditure will continue to dampen economic activity throughout the period, weighing on purchasing power. Inconsistent macroeconomic policies and an under-reliance on investment and exports to drive economic growth have kept income per head low even by regional standards. Nevertheless, the country's young and growing population will support growth in aggregate domestic demand. Household consumption supported by healthy growth in remittance income from the expatriate diaspora will remain the primary engine of economic growth, creating opportunities for retailers. We expect consumer market growth and opportunities to be stronger in urban areas. However, most Pakistanis will remain poor, with limited income for spending on discretionary items.
Outside cities, the development of the agricultural sector will drive much domestic demand; a large part of Pakistan's industrial sector is involved in processing agricultural products, and the agriculture sector directly employs close to half of the labour force. Manufacturing growth will also play a role, but will be constrained by chronic power supply problems. Nevertheless, we expect that a pick-up in power generation enabled by CPEC projects will provide new investment opportunities for businesses and should create openings for companies in supply-chain and service fields, such as logistics and finance.
As the population becomes increasingly urban, the services sector is likely to provide a growing contribution to the economy, particularly in telecommunications. There will also be continued opportunities in the healthcare sector, particularly in rural areas, as the government's fiscal compulsions of insufficient revenue and high expenditure on the military and debt repayments force limited allocation to this crucial sector. Military spending may offer opportunities for firms in the armaments sector, although the risk of technology leakage will probably deter suppliers other than China from offering more advanced military equipment.
Although the country's poverty rate was aggravated by the covid-19 pandemic, we expect a slow decline over the forecast horizon. The World Bank estimated that the poverty rate in Pakistan stood at 39.3% in 2020/21 and is projected to decline to 37.9% by 2022/23. Nevertheless, poverty in rural areas (which account for the majority of the population) will remain widespread and will constrain demand for big-ticket consumer goods. A wide divergence in income across Pakistan will also contribute to differences in consumption patterns. We expect the provinces of Sindh and Punjab to pace ahead, while Balochistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa remain characterised by widespread poverty.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 98,338 97,451 102,914 110,903 119,403 128,480
Housing & household fuels 79,804 81,848 86,106 93,144 101,248 110,400
Clothing & footwear 20,541 19,177 20,062 21,505 23,044 24,670
Household goods & services 11,424 10,599 11,103 11,930 12,837 13,819
Health 5,943 6,111 6,453 7,021 7,686 8,451
Transport & communications 28,275 28,290 29,172 30,520 32,190 34,785
Leisure & education 16,200 15,857 16,715 18,139 19,779 21,636
Other 7,489 8,230 9,378 11,003 12,971 15,339
Total 268,014 267,563 281,903 304,164 329,158 357,580
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 36.7 36.4 36.5 36.5 36.3 35.9
Housing & household fuels 29.8 30.6 30.5 30.6 30.8 30.9
Clothing & footwear 7.7 7.2 7.1 7.1 7.0 6.9
Household goods & services 4.3 4.0 3.9 3.9 3.9 3.9
Health 2.2 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.4
Transport & communications 10.5 10.6 10.3 10.0 9.8 9.7
Leisure & education 6.0 5.9 5.9 6.0 6.0 6.1
Other 2.8 3.1 3.3 3.6 3.9 4.3
Consumption will favour essentials over discretionary products Pakistan's low level of development and low average income ensure that consumer expenditure will be dominated by food, housing and fuel over 2022-26. Half of the population is reliant for employment on the agriculture sector, which we expect to grow relatively slowly in 2022-26, keeping income growth modest. High inflation and low incomes means that consumers are likely to continue to prioritise spending on essential items over discretionary items. Changes in consumption among Pakistan's elite make little impact on overall expenditure. Spending on food, beverages and tobacco will continue to account for the largest share of overall spending. Spending on leisure and education will rise very gradually over the forecast period as incomes recover, while spending on healthcare will also rise gradually with some progress in the public health infrastructure.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2021   2026  
  Pakistan Asia & Australasia (av) Pakistan Asia & Australasia (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 3.6 6.5 3.3 6.3
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 52 585 59 712
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 55.3 20.3 49.1 19.3
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 1.1 1.4 1.2 1.5
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 36.2 27.0 35.5 26.9
Meat consumption (kg per person) 17.9 36.0 19.4 36.4
Milk consumption (litres per person) 202.0 73.3 216.0 82.3
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 0.7 1.3 0.7 1.4
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 19 110 21 120
Telephone main lines 13 89 9 75
Mobile phone subscribers 843 1,110 982 1,170
Television sets 111 708 109 897
Personal computers 93 395 70 425
Households
No. of households (m) 31.7 992.4 34.9 1,052.3
No. of people per household (av) 7.1 3.8 7.1 3.7
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 7,290 19,530 9,470 21,730
Average monthly wage (US$) 115 984 138 1,260
Gini index 29.6 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); EIU estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population 1.74 1.26 1.41
Working-age population 2.10 1.55 1.72
Working-age minus total population 0.36 0.28 0.30
Labour force 2.32 1.64 1.85
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 3.4 2.9 3.0
Growth of real GDP 5.2 4.2 4.5
Labour productivity growth 2.2 2.5 2.4
Growth of capital stock 3.6 4.3 4.1
Total factor productivity growth 2.2 1.6 1.7
Initial conditions: Political and social instability has long held back economic development, undermined democratic institutions and weakened the judiciary. The military influence over civilian administrations has historically been strong and there is little sign that the armed forces will desist from driving a number of key policy areas, including foreign affairs and national security. There have been a number of military coups; the most recent was in 1999, when the army chief, Pervez Musharraf, ousted the then prime minister, Nawaz Sharif. Economic growth was strong under Mr Musharraf, but public protests prompted a return to democracy (and a parliamentary election) in 2008.
Democracy is not well-entrenched, and a return to military rule is possible The country's first transition of power between two democratically elected governments occurred in 2013, when Mr Sharif once again assumed power. In a positive move, in 2016 General Qamar Javed Bajwa replaced General Raheel Sharif as the chief of army staff-the first time in 20 years that an army chief in Pakistan had ended a single three-year term as planned. However, tensions were heightened between the government-led at the time by the Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz), or PML (N)-on one side and the military and judiciary on the other. These tensions will persist, and will continue to pose a threat to political stability. Parliamentary supremacy over the presidency may not sustain until 2050, as there remains a probability of the military taking over power in a very fractious political environment.
Although Pakistan entered an IMF programme in July 2019, which will help to counter the ongoing balance-of-payments and fiscal difficulties, meaningful structural reforms that could put the country on a fast and sustainable macroeconomic trajectory will be rare.
Demographic trends: Pakistan's population is forecast to grow fairly rapidly. At the current growth rate, EIU expects it to reach around 338m by 2050, compared with an estimated 225m in 2021. In theory, the country's favourable demographic trends will be conducive to rapid GDP growth, but unemployment and weak labour productivity will constrain growth. Previous governments have not planned adequately for the expansion of the labour force, failing to spend enough on infrastructure, education and social services. Successive administrations are likely to increase development spending in the long-term forecast period, but the process will be hampered by limited revenue and challenges in ensuring that increased development funding results in improved outcomes. The need for improvements in infrastructure, education and social services, combined with the low participation rate of women in the labour force (even by regional standards), will limit Pakistan's ability to benefit from its demographic dividend over the longer term.
External conditions: Pakistan's economic outlook will be shaped increasingly by financial and technical support from China. The two countries share deep and long-standing ties in both the military and civilian spheres. China will remain keen to reinforce its influence in the region by funding infrastructure projects under the multi-billion-dollar China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), but it will tighten loan conditions for Pakistan owing to the latter's increasingly precarious debt repayment ability. There is also a possibility that an inability to repay Chinese debt could lead to China stalling investments under CPEC for a period of time.
Pakistan's ties with the US will remain strained as the US focuses on India Pakistan's ties with the US will no longer remain favourable for Pakistan, as the US pivots away from its focus on Afghanistan, rendering Pakistan's position unimportant. Furthermore, current and future administrations in the US are likely to prioritise ties with India, weakening its co-operation with Pakistan in the process. Nevertheless, owing to the need to create sufficient employment opportunities, Pakistan will seek to deepen trade ties with Western countries in the coming decades. In the light of the intractable territorial dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir, as well as other issues such as cross-border terrorism, there will be generally hostile relations between these two nations.
Institutions and policy trends: Notwithstanding the grim current state of democratic freedoms and processes, Pakistan's democratic institutions are likely to become gradually more entrenched in the long term. However, the overall institutional and policy outlook for Pakistan will remain highly volatile, given the strong role of the armed forces. The military is not expected to relinquish control over its key interests and policy areas such as national security or foreign affairs for at least another decade. On the positive side, since 1999 Pakistan has made some progress on economic and structural reforms. However, the country's volatile political situation affects the quality of its underlying institutions and will determine the policies that are adopted.
Institutions and policy will improve slowly as civil servants and economists continue to strengthen their management and technology skills. Engagement with the IMF in 2019-23 will help the authorities to make some progress on major areas of reform, including privatisation, revenue collection and the move towards a more lightly managed exchange-rate regime. Such a move was seen in late 2021, when the government granted greater autonomy in lending to the State Bank of Pakistan (the central bank), thereby creating a potential to end crony-lending and prevent large defaults. However, significant structural reforms will be hard to come by as the momentum of reform dwindles once the IMF programme ends.
Long-term performance: Pakistan's labour force will grow rapidly, driven by a rise in the population. However, skill levels will not increase substantially. The average number of years of schooling will remain low, even by the standards of developing countries. It has taken nearly three decades for Pakistan to increase the mean years of schooling to 5.2 (in 2019, latest available from the UN), compared with 2.3 in 1990. Labour productivity will rise by around 2.1% per year in 2021-50. Pakistan's efforts to maintain rapid economic growth will continue to rely on textiles, low-end manufacturing and some services subsectors. A growing middle class and an increasingly dynamic private sector will spearhead this effort. An increased level of sophistication in managing the economy, as well as a gradual decoupling of political and economic administration as democratic institutions mature, will support growth rates, even in times of political turmoil. Successive governments will continue to increase spending on healthcare and education, while trying to contain the fiscal deficit at a level that does not threaten macroeconomic stability. Military expenditure will remain high. We expect real GDP growth to average 4.7% per year between 2021 and 2050. We expect GDP per head (at purchasing power parity) to reach US$26,540 in 2050, compared with US$41,320 in Bangladesh and US$46,580 in India.
Income and market size
  2021 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 225.2 263.0 338.0
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 348.3 633.4 2,641.5
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 1,550 2,410 7,810
Private consumption (US$ bn) 286.9 547.2 2,223.6
Private consumption per head (US$) 1,270 2,080 6,580
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 1,348.9 2,685.7 8,971.2
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 5,990 10,210 26,540
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 31.5 80.4 396.0
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 62.7 173.8 765.2
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 8.7 10.6 14.4
Share of world population (%) 2.9 3.2 3.6
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.4 0.4 0.6
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.9 1.2 1.6
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 0.1 0.2 0.3
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability Pakistan is likely to be particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. Water scarcity problems are likely to intensify as higher global temperatures accelerate glacial melt in the Himalayas, disrupting the traditional flow patterns in some of the country's key river systems. The negative effects on agricultural productivity of a rise in extreme weather events will be amplified by the country's burgeoning population, which will drive increased demand for food. A Ministry of Climate Change has been mandated to put an action plan in place. However, high levels of poverty and the government's weak underlying fiscal position will limit the country's ability to mitigate the impact of extreme weather events, particularly on the important agriculture sector. They will also limit the authorities' capacity to invest in infrastructure to adapt to climate change. In 2019 we developed a model to calculate the impact of climate change on long-term growth, and we find that the Pakistani economy will be 3.7% smaller in 2050 than it would have been without this hit to growth.
Migration and urbanisation Pakistan is one of the most urbanised countries in South Asia. Besides high birth rates, rapid migration from rural areas over the years has swelled the number of people in and around the urban centres of the country. According to the World Bank, the number of people living in the country's cities and towns will grow to 155.7m in 2045, from an estimated 82m in 2020. The actual levels of urbanisation are likely to be even higher as a large number of people live in informal settlements, as well as spillover urban belts that fall outside the formal administrative boundaries of major conurbations. Even as migrants are attracted to cities for better employment opportunities and access to services, Pakistan's urban centres will face serious challenges-particularly in the delivery of public services and infrastructure. Despite the government's efforts to address problems such as power shortages, poor sanitation and a lack of healthcare services, we do not expect these to be completely resolved for at least the next two decades. There is likely to be growing demand for transport-related investment as the country seeks rapid transit systems to solve the problem of public transport in its major urban centres. Massive infrastructure investments in housing and water are also likely to be required across the country in the next three decades
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 3.2 3.0 2.3 -3.7 5.7 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.6
US GDP growth 2.3 2.9 2.3 -3.4 5.7 2.3 1.3 1.4 1.9 2.0
EU27 GDP growth 2.9 2.1 1.8 -6.1 5.4 2.4 1.8 2.1 2.0 1.9
Asia & Australasia growth 4.8 4.5 3.5 -1.4 5.8 3.9 4.1 3.9 3.7 3.6
World trade growth 5.6 3.8 0.2 -4.9 10.9 4.3 4.2 3.8 3.6 3.6
US CPI 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.7 7.7 3.7 1.6 2.1 2.1
EU27 CPI 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.8 7.2 3.3 2.1 2.0 1.9
Manufactures export price 2.0 5.1 -1.4 0.8 5.8 2.8 2.2 3.2 2.4 1.6
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 70.4 107.9 95.5 86.5 78.0 69.0
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 1.5 3.2 2.8 2.7 2.7
¥:US$ (av) 112.1 110.4 109.0 106.8 109.8 126.3 131.7 129.6 121.6 117.8
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 138.7 150.5 154.8 149.5 146.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 a 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Expenditure on GDP (PRs bn at current market prices; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
GDP 35,553 39,190 43,798 47,540 55,796 66,950 75,569 81,293 88,347 96,961
Private consumption 28,800 31,906 36,301 38,265 45,960 57,065 62,829 68,148 74,349 81,858
Government consumption 3,823 4,308 4,708 5,604 6,103 6,794 7,956 8,653 9,279 10,103
Gross fixed investment 5,199 6,019 6,040 6,230 7,217 8,992 12,275 13,610 15,364 17,165
Exports of goods & services 2,923 3,363 4,113 4,421 5,054 7,008 8,625 9,819 11,036 12,278
Imports of goods & services 6,133 7,463 8,547 8,280 10,039 14,630 16,915 19,856 22,461 25,264
Stockbuilding 569 627 701 761 893 1,071 800 920 780 820
Domestic demand 38,391 42,861 47,750 50,861 60,172 73,923 83,860 91,330 99,772 109,946
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
GDP 339.2 356.1 320.9 300.4 348.3 377.7 b 378.3 398.0 423.7 452.6
Private consumption 274.8 289.9 266.0 241.8 286.9 322.0 314.5 333.6 356.6 382.1
Government consumption 36.5 39.2 34.5 35.4 38.1 38.3 39.8 42.4 44.5 47.2
Gross fixed investment 49.6 54.7 44.3 39.4 45.0 50.7 61.5 66.6 73.7 80.1
Exports of goods & services 27.9 30.6 30.1 27.9 31.5 39.5 43.2 48.1 52.9 57.3
Imports of goods & services 58.5 67.8 62.6 52.3 62.7 82.5 84.7 97.2 107.7 117.9
Stockbuilding 5.4 5.7 5.1 4.8 5.6 6.0 4.0 4.5 3.7 3.8
Domestic demand 366.3 389.5 349.9 321.4 375.6 417.1 419.8 447.1 478.5 513.2
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
Private consumption 81.0 81.4 82.9 80.5 82.4 85.2 83.1 83.8 84.2 84.4
Government consumption 10.8 11.0 10.7 11.8 10.9 10.1 10.5 10.6 10.5 10.4
Gross fixed investment 14.6 15.4 13.8 13.1 12.9 13.4 16.2 16.7 17.4 17.7
Stockbuilding 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.1 1.1 0.9 0.8
Exports of goods & services 8.2 8.6 9.4 9.3 9.1 10.5 11.4 12.1 12.5 12.7
Imports of goods & services 17.3 19.0 19.5 17.4 18.0 21.9 22.4 24.4 25.4 26.1
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 a 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Real expenditure on GDP (PRs bn at constant 2015/16 prices; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
GDP 34,176 36,278 37,184 36,710 39,092 41,511 43,048 44,411 46,852 50,033
Private consumption 27,916 29,916 31,583 30,674 33,545 36,948 38,587 40,240 42,988 46,074
Government consumption 3,628 3,827 3,766 4,087 4,161 4,020 4,221 4,368 4,543 4,770
Gross fixed investment 5,017 5,534 4,921 4,593 4,798 4,916 5,161 5,399 5,723 6,089
Exports of goods & services 2,930 3,224 3,649 3,704 3,945 4,278 4,688 5,009 5,273 5,599
Imports of goods & services 6,216 7,194 7,742 7,350 8,415 9,729 10,198 11,225 12,194 13,081
Stockbuilding 547 580 595 587 625 664 590 620 520 580
Domestic demand 37,107 39,857 40,866 39,941 43,129 46,548 48,559 50,627 53,773 57,513
Real expenditure on GDP (% change; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
GDP 4.4 6.2 2.5 -1.3 6.5 6.2 3.7 3.2 5.5 6.8
Private consumption 6.9 7.2 5.6 -2.9 9.4 10.1 4.4 4.3 6.8 7.2
Government consumption 4.5 5.5 -1.6 8.5 1.8 -3.4 5.0 3.5 4.0 5.0
Gross fixed investment 7.7 10.3 -11.1 -6.7 4.5 2.5 5.0 4.6 6.0 6.4
Exports of goods & services 2.5 10.0 13.2 1.5 6.5 8.4 9.6 6.9 5.3 6.2
Imports of goods & services 19.0 15.7 7.6 -5.1 14.5 15.6 4.8 10.1 8.6 7.3
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 -0.2 0.1 -0.2 0.1
Domestic demand 6.8 7.4 2.5 -2.3 8.0 7.9 4.3 4.3 6.2 7.0
Real contribution to GDP growth (%; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
Private consumption 5.5 5.9 4.6 -2.4 7.8 8.7 3.9 3.8 6.2 6.6
Government consumption 0.5 0.6 -0.2 0.9 0.2 -0.4 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.5
Gross fixed investment 1.1 1.5 -1.7 -0.9 0.6 0.3 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8
External balance -2.8 -2.0 -0.3 1.2 -2.2 -2.5 -0.1 -1.6 -1.6 -1.2
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 a 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Origin of GDP (PRs bn at constant 2015/16 prices; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
GDP at factor cost 31,914 33,860 34,916 34,587 36,573 38,755 40,268 41,542 43,826 46,626
Agriculture 7,469 7,758 7,831 8,138 8,421 8,674 b 8,890 9,139 9,432 9,715
Industry 6,213 6,784 6,801 6,410 6,911 7,408 7,748 8,151 8,640 9,185
Services 18,232 19,317 20,284 20,039 21,241 22,556 23,506 24,126 25,620 27,582
Origin of GDP (real % change; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
Agriculture 2.2 3.9 0.9 3.9 3.5 3.0 b 2.5 2.8 3.2 3.0
Industry 4.6 9.2 0.2 -5.7 7.8 7.2 4.6 5.2 6.0 6.3
Services 5.6 6.0 5.0 -1.2 6.0 6.2 4.2 2.6 6.2 7.7
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
Agriculture 23.4 22.9 22.4 23.5 23.0 c 22.4 b 22.1 22.0 21.5 20.8
Industry 19.5 20.0 19.5 18.5 18.9 19.1 19.2 19.6 19.7 19.7
Services 57.1 57.1 58.1 57.9 58.1 58.2 58.4 58.1 58.5 59.2
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity (%; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
Labour productivity growth 2.0 3.2 2.5 -0.3 4.4 2.1 0.7 -0.7 2.4 3.7
Total factor productivity growth 0.8 2.1 1.1 -1.9 4.3 2.6 0.5 -0.6 2.2 4.7
Growth of capital stock 6.4 6.9 4.6 3.3 3.4 3.3 3.5 3.6 3.9 3.3
Growth of potential GDP 4.7 6.2 4.1 0.8 6.9 5.9 2.5 2.7 4.9 7.2
Growth of real GDP 4.4 c 6.2 c 2.5 c -1.3 c 6.5 c 6.2 c 3.7 3.2 5.5 6.8
Growth of real GDP per head 2.3 c 4.0 c 0.4 c -3.2 c 4.5 4.2 1.8 1.3 3.7 5.0
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 207.9 212.2 216.6 220.9 225.2 229.5 233.8 238.0 242.2 246.4
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates; fiscal years ending June 30th) 339.2 356.1 320.9 300.4 348.3 a 377.7 378.3 398.0 423.7 452.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates; fiscal years ending June 30th) 1,630 1,680 1,480 1,360 1,550 1,650 1,620 1,670 1,750 1,840
Private consumption (US$ bn; fiscal years ending June 30th) 274.8 289.9 266.0 241.8 286.9 a 322.0 a 314.5 333.6 356.6 382.1
Private consumption per head (US$; fiscal years ending June 30th) 1,320 1,370 1,230 1,090 1,270 1,400 1,350 1,400 1,470 1,550
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 1,058.5 1,166.1 1,219.4 1,216.2 1,348.9 a 1,518.3 a 1,631.3 1,713.2 1,845.3 2,012.0
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 5,090 5,490 5,630 5,510 5,990 6,620 6,980 7,200 7,620 8,160
Personal disposable income (PRs bn) 32,461 b 35,985 b 40,942 b 38,265 b 45,960 57,065 58,828 62,512 68,368 77,381
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 307.8 b 295.4 b 272.9 b 236.4 b 282.1 297.5 290.9 303.1 324.8 357.8
Growth of real disposable income (%) 7.0 b 7.2 b 5.6 b -13.9 b 9.4 10.1 -2.2 2.2 7.1 10.2
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 2.77 2.81 2.84 2.87 2.90 2.93 2.99 3.04 3.10 3.05
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.42 0.42 0.37 0.36 0.37 a 0.38 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.37
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.88 0.91 0.92 0.93 0.93 a 0.96 a 0.97 0.97 0.99 1.04
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 a 0.13 0.15 0.15 0.16 0.17
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP; fiscal years ending Jun 30th)
Government expenditure 19.1 19.1 19.1 20.3 18.5 a 20.5 a 19.5 20.4 20.1 19.8
Interest 3.9 4.1 4.9 5.6 4.8 5.5 5.8 6.6 6.6 6.1
Non-interest 15.2 15.0 14.1 14.7 13.7 15.0 13.6 13.8 13.5 13.6
Government revenue 13.9 13.3 11.2 13.2 12.4 a 13.6 a 14.1 15.4 14.0 14.0
Budget balance -5.2 -5.8 -7.9 -7.1 -6.1 a -6.9 a -5.4 -5.0 -6.1 -5.8
Primary balance -1.3 -1.6 -3.0 -1.5 -1.3 -1.5 0.4 1.6 0.5 0.4
Government debt 54.5 b 55.6 b 57.9 b 60.8 b 58.2 55.6 54.9 56.3 58.0 58.8
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate PRs:US$ (av) 105.46 121.82 150.04 161.84 162.91 191.84 202.25 206.25 210.50 216.25
Exchange rate PRs:US$ (year-end) 110.43 138.79 154.87 159.59 176.52 203.05 206.25 210.88 213.38 215.13
Exchange rate PRs:¥100 (av) 94.04 110.32 137.61 151.58 148.40 151.94 153.57 159.17 173.18 183.65
Exchange rate PRs:¥100 (year-end) 98.00 126.52 142.51 154.66 153.27 153.87 157.08 169.51 179.16 184.66
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 121.32 c 106.78 c 96.23 c 96.75 c 100.07 c 99.62 100.25 100.03 98.61 97.08
Purchasing power parity PRs:US$ (av) 33.80 37.21 39.48 39.98 42.06 47.73 46.91 47.92 48.34 48.64
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 10.9 11.0 12.2 17.7 14.4 c 9.8 15.3 11.6 8.7 12.5
Domestic credit growth (%) 13.1 16.4 16.0 12.3 14.1 c 11.5 13.2 11.3 8.7 12.5
Lending rate (av; %) 7.0 7.9 12.4 9.9 8.1 10.9 11.4 11.0 10.2 9.7
Deposit rate (av; %) 2.9 3.3 5.9 4.9 3.7 5.5 5.9 5.7 4.6 4.0
Short-term interest rate (av; %) 5.8 7.2 11.5 8.6 7.6 c 12.2 15.1 13.3 12.2 9.4
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 63.8 65.5 67.0 68.5 70.0 c 72.3 73.1 75.4 77.0 78.7
Labour force (% change) 2.5 2.6 2.2 2.3 2.2 c 3.2 1.2 3.2 2.1 2.1
Unemployment rate (%) 6.1 c 5.8 c 6.9 c 12.4 c 11.0 c 10.3 8.7 8.1 7.3 6.5
Wage and price inflation (%)
Consumer prices (av) 5.0 5.3 9.4 9.5 9.5 18.5 9.6 6.0 4.1 3.7
Consumer prices (year-end) 5.1 5.8 12.4 8.0 12.3 15.7 8.8 5.6 3.9 3.7
Producer prices (av) 4.9 12.1 14.2 5.8 18.0 30.2 15.1 5.2 6.0 5.6
GDP deflator (av) 4.0 3.8 9.0 9.9 10.2 13.0 a 8.8 4.3 3.0 2.8
Private consumption deflator (av) 3.2 3.4 7.8 8.5 9.8 12.7 a 5.4 4.0 2.1 2.7
Government consumption deflator (av) 5.4 6.8 11.0 9.7 6.9 15.2 a 11.5 5.1 3.1 3.7
Fixed investment deflator (av) 3.6 5.0 12.8 10.5 10.9 21.6 a 30.0 6.0 6.5 5.0
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -16.2 -18.9 -8.6 -0.7 -12.3 -19.1 -18.0 -21.0 -14.5 -11.0
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.8 -5.3 -2.7 -0.2 -3.5 -5.1 -4.8 -5.3 -3.4 -2.4
Goods: exports fob 23.2 24.8 24.8 21.9 29.1 33.3 37.6 40.4 44.5 46.6
Goods: imports fob -52.8 -56.8 -47.7 -44.1 -66.6 -79.4 -87.1 -93.1 -93.8 -94.9
Trade balance -29.6 -31.9 -22.9 -22.2 -37.5 -46.1 -49.5 -52.7 -49.3 -48.3
Services: credit 6.3 5.9 5.9 5.4 6.5 6.6 7.4 7.7 8.0 8.3
Services: debit -11.7 -11.7 -10.3 -8.0 -9.8 -11.1 -12.2 -13.1 -13.8 -14.4
Services balance -5.4 -5.7 -4.4 -2.6 -3.3 -4.5 -4.9 -5.5 -5.8 -6.1
Primary income: credit 0.7 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.7 0.7 1.3 1.8 2.0 2.0
Primary income: debit -5.9 -6.1 -6.6 -5.4 -5.1 -6.2 -5.7 -7.5 -7.1 -7.5
Primary income balance -5.2 -5.4 -6.1 -4.9 -4.4 -5.4 -4.4 -5.8 -5.1 -5.5
Secondary income: credit 24.2 24.5 25.1 29.4 33.3 37.2 41.1 43.2 46.0 49.1
Secondary income: debit -0.2 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4
Secondary income balance 24.0 24.2 24.9 29.0 33.0 36.9 40.8 42.9 45.7 48.8
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 106.9 100.4 88.0 89.5 c 91.5 c 107.6 115.4 120.0 128.4 131.9
Export prices (% change) 0.2 -6.1 -12.4 1.7 c 2.2 c 17.6 7.2 4.0 7.0 2.7
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 108.8 101.9 86.0 78.9 c 100.7 c 117.5 123.4 129.4 132.1 135.9
Import prices (% change) -0.9 -6.4 -15.6 -8.2 c 27.6 c 16.7 5.0 4.9 2.0 2.9
Terms of trade (2010=100) 98.3 98.6 102.4 113.4 c 90.9 c 91.5 93.5 92.7 97.2 97.0
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 5.9 c 4.3 c 0.1 c -5.8 c 12.1 c 5.0 3.4 3.3 2.9 3.2
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment 2.5 1.7 2.2 2.1 2.1 0.9 1.4 2.0 2.3 2.7
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 0.7 0.5 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 5.0 3.2 5.0 5.2 4.7 1.8 2.3 2.9 3.1 3.3
Outward direct investment -0.05 0.02 0.09 0.05 -0.24 -0.10 -0.08 -0.08 -0.09 -0.09
Net foreign direct investment 2.4 1.8 2.3 2.1 1.9 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.2 2.6
Stock of foreign direct investment 40.9 34.2 31.6 32.4 33.0 33.9 35.3 37.3 39.6 42.2
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 197 161 146 147 147 148 151 157 163 171
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 12.0 9.6 9.8 10.8 9.5 9.0 9.3 9.4 9.3 9.3
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.12 0.44 0.22 0.20 0.19 0.07 0.11 0.15 0.17 0.19
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.14 0.11 0.09 0.10 0.09 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.09
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 91.7 99.2 107.9 116.5 124.6 132.1 136.9 145.3 151.5 156.9
Total external debt (% of GDP) 27.0 27.9 33.6 38.8 35.8 35.0 36.2 36.5 35.8 34.7
Debt/exports ratio (%) 183 188 202 216 200 182 167 166 162 159
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 13.5 11.4 20.6 16.7 b 17.0 23.3 20.1 19.0 16.0 15.3
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU
Global data US and OECD GDP growth: OECD
World trade growth: EIU aggregates
OECD and US consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent Blend
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
Domestic data GDP: expenditure on GDP at constant market prices on a fiscal-year basis (ending on June 30th of year indicated)
GDP growth: Ministry of Finance, Economic Survey
US$ GDP: IMF, IFS
Population: Federal Bureau of Statistics, Pakistan Statistical Yearbook; Ministry of Finance, Economic Survey; UN, World Development Report
GDP per head: growth in real GDP deflated by population growth
Inflation: based on a combined cost-of-living index for industrial, commercial and government employees; Ministry of Finance, Economic Survey; Prime Minister's Secretariat, Consumer Price Index Data
Exchange rate: IMF, IFS; Financial Times
Balance of payments: IMF, IFS
Foreign debt: World Bank, International Debt Statistics
Foreign direct investment: UNCTAD, World Investment Report
Abbreviations IFS: International Financial Statistics
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows the EIU to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by the EIU for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2017-21) and from EIU assessments for the forecast period (2022-26). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by the EIU for 2017-21. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2022-26 are based on EIU assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; the EIU, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2017-21 ranges are then used to derive 2022-26 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2022-26, not to the likely situation in 2026 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2019 or 2024). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2017-21   2022-26  
  Pakistan Regional average a Pakistan Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 2 3.8 1 3.6
  2. Risk of social unrest 2 3.2 2 3.1
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 3 3.4 3 3.6
  4. Government and opposition 1 3.7 2 3.7
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 1 3.4 1 3.4
  6. International disputes or tensions 3 3.4 2 2.7
  7. Government policy towards business 3 3.5 3 3.5
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 2 3.4 2 3.2
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 2 3.3 2 3.4
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 2 2.9 2 3.2
 11. Efficiency of legal system 2 3.1 2 3.2
 12. Corruption 1 2.7 2 3.0
 13. Impact of crime 2 3.5 2 3.7
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 4 4.7 4 4.6
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 2 3.1 2 3.1
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 4 3.8 3 3.4
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 2 4.6 3 3.7
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 3 4.6 3 4.4
  6. Quality of policymaking 2 3.5 2 3.5
  7. Institutional underpinnings 2 3.5 2 3.6
  8. Asset prices 1 2.6 1 2.6
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 5 4.4 5 4.6
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 2 3.6 2 3.8
  3. Real GDP growth* 3 2.8 4 3.5
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 2 3.8 2 3.8
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 3 2.0 3 2.5
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 3 2.2 3 2.8
  7. The natural resource endowment* 1 2.4 1 2.4
  8. Profitability* 4 2.9 5 3.6
  9. Regional integration 2 2.9 2 3.2
 10. Proximity to markets 2 2.5 2 2.4
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 3 4.0 3 4.1
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 2 3.2 3 3.6
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 2 3.5 3 3.5
  4. Promotion of competition 2 2.9 2 3.1
  5. Protection of intellectual property 1 2.7 1 3.1
  6. Price controls 3 3.6 4 3.7
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 2 2.7 2 2.6
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 3 3.2 3 3.3
  9. Minority shareholders 3 3.4 3 3.6
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 4 3.6 4 3.7
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 2 3.4 2 3.4
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 4 3.9 4 4.1
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 2 3.3 2 3.4
  5. Government favouritism 4 3.6 4 3.5
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 3 3.8 3 3.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 2 3.8 2 4.0
  3. Ease of trading* 3 3.8 3 4.1
  4. Openness of trade* 2 3.8 3 4.1
  5. Restrictions on the current account 3 4.5 3 4.5
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 3 3.7 2 4.0
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 5 4.5 5 4.3
  3. Value-added tax* 3 4.2 2 3.9
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 4 3.8 4 3.9
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 3 3.1 3 3.5
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 3 3.3 3 3.5
  7. Tax complexity 2 3.2 2 3.5
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 3 3.4 2 3.4
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 2 3.9 3 4.0
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 4 4.1 4 4.1
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 3 3.2 3 3.5
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 3 3.3 3 3.8
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 3 3.5 3 3.6
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 5 4.2 5 4.2
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 2 3.4 2 3.9
  3. Quality of workforce* 2 3.1 2 3.2
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 3 3.6 3 3.6
  5. Health of the workforce* 2 4.0 2 4.1
  6. Level of technical skills 2 3.5 2 3.6
  7. Cost of living* 4 2.6 4 3.3
  8. Incidence of strikes* 4 3.7 4 3.8
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 2 3.3 2 3.4
 10. Extent of wage regulation 3 3.7 3 3.6
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 3 3.2 3 2.9
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 1 3.5 2 3.7
  2. Broadband connection speed* 2 3.5 2 4.1
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 2 3.1 2 3.6
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 2 3.4 2 3.6
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 2 2.6 2 3.1
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 2 3.5 3 3.7
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 3 3.5 3 3.8
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 1 2.8 1 3.2
  9. Rents of office space* 5 2.2 5 2.1
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 2 3.6 2 3.6
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 2 3.8 2 4.1
  3. Scope of e-government* 1 3.6 2 3.8
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 3 3.9 2 3.6
  5. Internet use* 1 3.1 1 3.6
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 1 3.2 1 3.7
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 2 3.2 2 3.4
  8. Research infrastructure* 1 3.4 1 3.4
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.

Subject: Tax rates; Macroeconomics; Infrastructure; Foreign exchange rates; Muslims; Politics; Productivity; Consumption; International trade; Taxation; Purchasing power parity; Population growth; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Inflation; Expenditures; Coalition governments; Wage & price controls; Economic growth

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Macroeconomics Infrastructure Foreign exchange rates Productivity Consumption International trade Taxation Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Inflation Wage & price controls Economic growth

Location: Pakistan; Asia-Pacific region

Company / organization: Name: Senate; NAICS: 921120

Identifier / keyword: Pakistan; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Forecast Pakistan July 2022

Publication title: Country Forecast. Pakistan; New York

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jul 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09668888

e-ISSN: 20489544

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2714191241

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-pakistan-july-2022/docview/2714191241/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Ecuador July 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-ecuador-july-2022/docview/2714195120/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Long-term outlook 2022-30 2031-50 2022-50 Growth and productivity (% change; annual av) Growth of real GDP per head 0.9 1.1 1.0 Growth of real GDP 1.9 1.8 1.8 Labour productivity growth 0.2 1.4 1.0 Low levels of productivity and a wealth of natural resources offer scope for Ecuador to catch up with more developed countries, provided that policies are implemented to transform its resource wealth into productive investment in other sectors. Fact sheet Annual data 2021a Historical averages (%) 2017-21 Population (m) 17.7 Population growth 1.4 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 106.2 Real GDP growth -0.1 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 208.6 Real domestic demand growth 0.7 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 5,992 Inflation 0.1 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 11,774 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.7 Exchange rate (av) :US$ 1.0 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 0.9 a Actual. Background: Ecuador restored its presidential democracy in 1979, but its institutions remain fragile. Since 1997 three of the country's presidents have been ousted by popular protests that broke out as a result of economic shocks. The Lasso administration has continued the IMF programme, as part of which it has implemented a tax reform to increase fiscal revenue, cut the public-sector wage bill and strengthened the central bank's independence.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Ecuador&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Ecuador+July+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-07-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Ecuador&amp;rft.issn=09669515&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - EIU expects the president, Guillermo Lasso of the centre-right Creando Oportunidades (Creo) party, to complete his term in office (which ends in 2025), despite a challenging political landscape. His government holds only 12 of the 137 seats in the unicameral National Assembly, and there is little possibility of him being able to build a stable governing coalition. This weak position in the legislature, combined with elevated levels of unrest (reflected in nationwide protests in June), will undermine political stability throughout the rest of Mr Lasso's four-year term. Indeed, the political opposition in Congress recently tried to capitalise on the social unrest by attempting to impeach the president; although he survived, his position is now substantially weaker. Although it is not our baseline forecast, there are significant risks that Mr Lasso may be ousted before his term ends. Assuming that the president remains in his role, progress on his market-friendly policy agenda will slow significantly, as his proposals to attract private investment and correct macroeconomic imbalances are likely to encounter political and public pushback.

Ecuador--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.63 5.66 72 62 10 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

- Ecuador's overall business environment score and rankings improve in the 2022-26 forecast period compared with the 2017-21 historical period, owing to the business-friendly stance of the Lasso administration, particularly its policies to encourage foreign investment and private enterprise. However, the government will find its scope for implementing market-friendly reforms severely constrained by strident opposition from well-organised indigenous groups and the opposition-dominated Congress. Structural weaknesses, such as inadequate access to local finance and Ecuador's small market size, will also prove limiting factors and will be difficult for the government to tackle.

Ecuador--highlights: Economic outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 4.2 2.5 2.1 1.9 1.3 1.9
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 0.1 3.9 3.0 2.2 2.1 1.6
Budget balance (% of GDP) -1.5 0.0 0.8 1.3 1.2 1.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.8 3.6 3.1 2.4 2.5 1.7
Exchange rate US$:US$ (av) 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0

- Ecuador's real GDP will not recover to its pre-pandemic level until 2023. Domestic demand will be hampered by a limited labour market recovery, partly reflecting a lack of fiscal stimulus during the pandemic. The Lasso government will continue efforts to consolidate the public finances, but the public debt burden will remain high. Dollarisation provides a basis for macroeconomic stability and will help to keep inflation low, but a more robust economic growth trajectory is unlikely without a significant increase in private-sector investment.

Ecuador--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2016 2021 2026
Total 16.5 17.7 18.7
 Male 8.3 8.9 9.3
 Female 8.3 8.9 9.3
Period averages (%)   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth   1.4 1.0
Working-age population growth   1.69 1.17
Labour force growth   1.8 1.7

- A falling birth rate is contributing to slower population growth, but at an average rate of 1.4% per year in 2022-26, Ecuador's population growth will still be above the regional average. Meanwhile, Ecuador's labour force growth will outstrip its own population growth and labour force growth in more advanced countries, which will give rise to a demographic dividend that could help Ecuador to converge with more developed economies in the region.

Ecuador--highlights: Market opportunities   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 106.2 110.7 116.4 120.4 123.7 127.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 5,992 6,176 6,425 6,580 6,695 6,801
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 65.2 69.5 73.5 76.5 79.1 81.8
Household consumption (US$ bn) 65.2 69.0 72.4 75.0 77.3 79.7
Household consumption per head (US$) 3,680 3,850 4,000 4,100 4,180 4,270

- Ecuador is one of the smallest markets in our business environment rankings. The slow recovery of the domestic market from the pandemic-induced recession is unlikely to pick up significantly, as there are signs of permanent damage to households' incomes. Significant mineral reserves and efforts to improve the investment environment will attract oil and mining investors, but opportunities outside these sectors will remain restricted by low purchasing power (in terms of GDP per head). Persistent income inequality and poverty will also hinder robust growth in household consumption.

Ecuador--highlights: Long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 0.9 1.1 1.0
Growth of real GDP 1.9 1.8 1.8
Labour productivity growth 0.2 1.4 1.0

- Low levels of productivity and a wealth of natural resources offer scope for Ecuador to catch up with more developed countries, provided that policies are implemented to transform its resource wealth into productive investment in other sectors. Ecuador will benefit from its dollarised system and from incremental improvements to the business environment. However, the prospects for strengthening institutions are meagre, which bodes poorly for a more stable economic policy direction. Assuming that structural weaknesses, obstacles to governability and inconsistent policymaking continue to present challenges, long-term investment will be low and incomes will remain below OECD levels.

Fact sheet Annual data 2021 a Historical averages (%) 2017-21
Population (m) 17.7 Population growth 1.4
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 106.2 Real GDP growth -0.1
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 208.6 Real domestic demand growth 0.7
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 5,992 Inflation 0.1
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 11,774 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.7
Exchange rate (av) :US$ 1.0 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 0.9
a Actual.
Background: Ecuador restored its presidential democracy in 1979, but its institutions remain fragile. Since 1997 three of the country's presidents have been ousted by popular protests that broke out as a result of economic shocks. Ecuador's longest-serving president, the left-wing Rafael Correa (2007-17), was succeeded by Lenín Moreno (2017-21), who introduced a series of constitutional reforms-including the reintroduction of a two-term limit for the presidency-that were approved by referendum in February 2018. Although this was a step towards deeper democratisation, social and fiscal challenges will persist under the current president, Guillermo Lasso, who took office in May 2021.
Political structure: Ecuador has a presidential system. The president and the 137 members of the unicameral National Assembly are elected for four-year terms, with a two-term limit. The 2008 constitution increased executive power and allowed the president to fast-track economic legislation, but a fragmented political landscape and the latent threat of sweeping protests severely hinder governability. Although it is formally independent, the judiciary is politicised.
Policy issues: Dollarisation has provided a degree of macroeconomic stability but has also exposed Ecuador's underlying lack of competitiveness. A wide fiscal deficit under Mr Correa, coupled with lower oil prices after 2015, triggered the need for major fiscal adjustments. In September 2020 the Moreno government secured a 27-month, US$6.5bn extended fund facility (EFF) agreement with the IMF to support fiscal consolidation and structural reform. The Lasso administration has continued the IMF programme, as part of which it has implemented a tax reform to increase fiscal revenue, cut the public-sector wage bill and strengthened the central bank's independence. Fuel subsidies are a major policy challenge, as they constitute a heavy burden on the public finances, but there is strong social and political opposition to removing them.
Taxation: Taxes have been subject to frequent changes. The main taxes in Ecuador are income tax, levied at rates of up to 35%, and value-added tax (VAT), levied at 12%. Private firms must distribute 15% of their profits among their employees.
Foreign trade: Ecuador recorded a trade surplus of US$3.3bn in 2021; petrol export earnings averaged 32% of total export revenue, compared with more than 50% during the commodity boom in the 2000s.
Major exports 2020 % of total Major imports 2020 % of total
Oil & oil products 25.8 Raw materials 33.4
Shrimp 18.8 Capital goods 23.2
Banana & plantain 18.0 Fuel & lubricants 21.9
Canned fish 6.0 Consumption goods 14.8
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
US 23.3 US 24.5
China 15.7 China 17.7
Panama 11.9 Colombia 8.5
Chile 4.0 Panama 4.3
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance The president, Guillermo Lasso of the centre-right Creando Oportunidades (Creo) party, took office in May 2021 for a four-year term after winning a run-off election against a left-wing candidate, Andrés Arauz. No party achieved a majority in the 2021 election; in fact, Mr Lasso's party has just 12 seats in the unicameral 137-seat National Assembly, which is dominated by left-of-centre parties. This has made forging a governing coalition difficult. The largest party in Congress is the leftist Unión por la Esperanza (UNES), which is the continuation of the political movement led by a former president, Rafael Correa (2007-17). The next-largest party in Congress is the indigenous Movimiento de Unidad Plurinacional Pachakutik (Pachakutik), which also opposes the government's pro-market reform agenda. The conservative Partido Social Cristiano (PSC) is the third-largest force, followed by the centre-left Izquierda Democrática (ID). The legislative landscape is fluid, with legislators often switching party allegiances or leaving parties to become independents, which makes governability extremely difficult.
National Assembly, 2022
(no. of seats)
Unión por la Esperanza 47
Pachakutik 18
Partido Social Cristiano 14
Creando Oportunidades 12
Izquierda Democrática 10
Others 36
Total 137
Political outlook: Political stability The risk that Mr Lasso will become a lame-duck president has risen significantly in recent months. The most serious threat to political stability and governability stems from National Assembly's increasing hostility to his administration. Another major risk is social unrest, as reflected in ongoing anti-government protests that broke out on June 13th. Although EIU still expects Mr Lasso to complete his term, there is a growing risk that he will be ousted by Congress or forced to call early elections.
Weaker relations with Congress will make Mr Lasso increasingly vulnerable and hinder his reform agenda. At the heart of the discord is the fact that Creo holds only 12 of the 137 seats in Congress. Its electoral alliance with the PSC, which holds 14 seats, collapsed just before Mr Lasso took office. He has kept trying to build an ad hoc coalition with the centre-left ID, Pachakutik and independents, but the significant ideological differences between the conservative, market-oriented president and the left-wing parties have proven impossible to overcome, and disunity will impede policymaking. Illustrating this, ID and Pachakutik legislators refused to back reforms to the investment environment that Mr Lasso proposed in March. The president responded by vowing to sideline Congress and use his executive powers to make changes instead. Executive-legislative relations have deteriorated even further since the opposition-supported by dissidents from Pachakutik-unseated the National Assembly leader, Guadalupe Llori, who had maintained fairly cordial relations with the executive.
In this environment, there is a growing risk that Congress will oust Mr Lasso or that he will use a constitutional provision that would allow him to automatically dissolve Congress under the argument of a political crisis. However, this would also trigger a new presidential election, and there is no sign yet that Mr Lasso is willing to gamble his own position in order to break the impasse in Congress; he has publicly stated that he will not use that mechanism for now.
Increased social unrest-amplified by a rise in living costs and violent crime-is adding to Mr Lasso's problems and causing his approval ratings to fall. A wave of anti-government protests started on June 13th, led by the Confederación de Nacionalidades Indígenas del Ecuador (Conaie, Ecuador's largest indigenous organisation). When this report went to press, the protests, which included calls for Mr Lasso's resignation, were into their second week, and had spread to the capital, Quito. The government originally declared a state of emergency that limited citizens' rights to assembly and transit, but it later authorised "peaceful manifestations" after Congress threatened to revoke the emergency decree.
We believe that the protests will eventually calm down and that Mr Lasso will remain in power, but the risks of increased political instability are very high. We also expect the president to try to repair his standing with voters by hailing the oil windfall and using a portion of the extra income to cap fuel prices and repair infrastructure. It is now less certain whether he will follow through with his proposal to bypass Congress by putting economic reforms to a referendum in the second half of the year; he will probably base his decision on how his political standing evolves after the protests.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness Politicised institutions, corruption, an inefficient bureaucracy and a complex, archaic tax system have long undermined institutional effectiveness. Although constitutional amendments in 2008 and 2015 tilted discretional power in the executive's favour, this did little to improve political effectiveness and reduced accountability. The fragmented party system and various groups' ability to effectively veto government policies are factors that have worked against political effectiveness since Ecuador became a presidential democracy in 1979, leading on several occasions to large-scale protests and coups.
Given these structural weaknesses in Ecuadorean politics, governability will remain weak in 2022-26. Unlike the previous two presidents, Mr Lasso lacks a single-party majority in Congress. In this environment, securing cross-party support will prove difficult; political coalitions are rare in Ecuador, as voters are generally suspicious of these kinds of accords, believing that some kind of corruption will be involved. Reflecting the difficulties inherent in establishing and maintaining political agreements, two government-backed coalitions have fallen apart: the PSC's electoral alliance with Creo collapsed just before Mr Lasso took office, as Creo withdrew its support for a PSC figure to head the legislature. Creo's subsequent ad hoc coalition with Pachakutik and ID also broke down owing to ideological differences. Amid the turmoil, UNES, the PSC and some members of Pachakutik and ID have formed an ad hoc coalition of their own, which will make it significantly more difficult for Mr Lasso to formulate and execute policy. The constitution grants the president significant powers that could help in this regard; we expect Mr Lasso to make use of executive decrees, although doing so could fuel even more political opposition.
Despite some improvements in governance since 2017, there are still serious challenges to political and institutional effectiveness: the bureaucracy is inefficient; governability is weak; policymaking is subject to the demands of an array of vested interests; and law enforcement is inadequate. These obstacles are compounded by bouts of social unrest. Social groups are well organised and have succeeded in reversing or blocking the implementation of government policy. For example, indigenous groups managed to oust the three presidents who came before Mr Correa. More recently, in October 2019 and June 2022, they forced the administrations to roll back market-friendly reforms and cuts to fuel subsidies. These groups will continue to undermine Mr Lasso's attempts to push forward with his reform agenda.
Corruption will remain a hindrance throughout the forecast period Corruption is another factor that will weigh on political effectiveness. Although the Lasso administration will step up its efforts to tackle the issue, its scope to continue strengthening institutional capacity to tackle corruption has narrowed significantly as political stability has weakened. In May Mr Lasso reinstated the anti-corruption secretariat (following its abolition in 2020); it has cabinet-level power and is tasked with designing, co-ordinating and supervising anti-corruption efforts. The secretariat has developed a national anti-corruption strategy, although funding for its activities will remain limited, which will slow the pace of reforms. A case in point here is an IMF-backed proposal to establish a national system to combat corruption in procurement practices that has yet to be fully implemented.
Although these measures will build on reforms that the Moreno administration adopted to reduce political interference by the judiciary and curb graft, we expect overall progress on reducing corruption to be limited. Previous initiatives have yielded few tangible results, and Mr Lasso's weak legislative position will hamper efforts to advance anti-corruption legislation that the opposition deems controversial (as also occurred under Mr Moreno). The misuse of funds in public institutions and networks of corruption within the state, including the judicial system, will be exceedingly difficult to root out.
Political outlook: Election watch The next national elections are not due until 2025. There is a risk that political instability will force early elections, although that is not our baseline forecast. Mr Lasso became president in mid-2021, after defeating Mr Arauz of UNES in the second-round run-off. His victory was not an endorsement of his agenda, but rather a rejection of the politics and governance style of Mr Correa, who served as Mr Arauz's political mentor. Trends that emerged during the election will remain relevant and will influence perceptions of Mr Lasso's government; voters want action on environmental protection and human rights (particularly for women), and are wary of a government that quashes dissent and attacks its opposition (in the manner of the Correa administration). Demands of this kind could precipitate a shift back towards the left wing of politics in 2025.
Political outlook: International relations Promoting international trade and increasing foreign investment are among Mr Lasso's policy priorities. Having already reduced tariffs, the government will seek to ease bureaucratic procedures for exporters while strengthening ties with commercial partners. The government hopes that the tariff cuts will improve its chances of negotiating a free-trade agreement (FTA) with the US, acceding to the Pacific Alliance and the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), and securing agreements with other major export markets, notably Mexico. However, we consider signing an FTA with the US to be a long-term goal at best.
Mr Lasso is also keen to maintain Ecuador's ties with China; the bilateral relationship was strengthened under Mr Correa, whose administration accrued considerable (still-outstanding) debt to that country. During a visit to China in February Mr Lasso met his counterpart, Xi Jinping, and signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on negotiations for a bilateral FTA. Mr Lasso wants to conclude the deal within a year, although we think that 2024-25 is a more likely timeframe. Whenever it materialises, the agreement should provide a modest boost to both imports and exports. Nonetheless, we note the serious challenge involved in maintaining warm relations with both the US and China, and recognise that Ecuador could ultimately be forced to align itself with one geopolitical superpower over the other. We do not currently expect this to happen in 2022-26, but if it did, we assume that Mr Lasso would side with the US.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
Overall position 4.63 5.66 72 62 10 7
Political environment 4.5 5.0 66 58 11 8
 Political stability 5.9 6.3 51 49 9 7
 Political effectiveness 3.3 3.9 72 68 11 9
Macroeconomic environment 7.5 8.0 27 11 2 1
Market opportunities 3.3 4.6 77 68 10 9
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 4.0 5.5 66 52 10 6
Policy towards foreign investment 4.2 6.4 72 49 10 6
Foreign trade & exchange controls 6.4 7.3 60 57 8 8
Taxes 5.3 6.1 62 52 7 3
Financing 3.6 5.1 73 67 9 8
The labour market 4.8 5.4 77 70 12 10
Infrastructure 4.3 5.3 67 64 8 7
Technological readiness 3.3 3.5 74 75 10 11
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Ecuador's score and placings in EIU's business environment rankings improve markedly in the 2022-26 forecast period, reflecting the market-friendly stance of the president, Guillermo Lasso. Progress on macroeconomic stability began under the former president, Lenin Moreno (2017-21), who sought to correct imbalances that had built up under his left-wing, populist predecessor, Rafael Correa (2007-17), which were deterring foreign investment and threatening dollarisation. However, a high level of political instability has kept the scope for reform narrow, which explains why Ecuador's score and position in the rankings are still relatively poor.
The country's highest score is for its macroeconomic environment, reflecting the stability engendered by dollarisation, an improving fiscal position owing to fiscal consolidation efforts and a rise in oil prices in 2022-26 compared with the 2017-21 historical period. Another factor supporting the macroeconomic environment is a 27-month, US$6.5bn extended fund facility (EFF) programme with the IMF, which was signed in September 2020 by Mr Moreno and extended by Mr Lasso. The EFF will help to consolidate the public finances, which deteriorated under Mr Correa and worsened amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Political instability puts improvements in business environment at risk However, despite this improvement in the macroeconomic environment, our forecasts are subject to an unusually high degree of uncertainty owing to rising social and political instability. Following significant unrest in June 2022, it is unclear how much of Mr Lasso's agenda will make it through the opposition-dominated Congress, and there is a significant risk that he may become a lame-duck president. To quell protests and deflate an impeachment movement against him, Mr Lasso was forced to make significant policy concessions, including increasing fuel subsidies. Further social unrest is likely to force the government to delay or dilute its future reforms, shelve them altogether, or even roll back ones that have already been enacted.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Ecuador's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: Policies promoting private-sector investment benefit certain industries, including mining and oil. Implementation of antitrust policies is subject to politicisation.
2024-26: Government continues to scale back state's role in development, but regulation and licensing still favour state-run companies over private-sector ones. Price controls on fuels remain in place.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Overtures to foreign firms and pro-business reforms partly offset continued government interventionism.
2024-26: Inadequate property rights protection and questions regarding access to foreign arbitration deter investment.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: Government tries to drive export growth by pursuing free-trade agreements (FTAs) with China and US, and by seeking membership of Pacific Alliance; of these, EIU expects only Pacific Alliance membership to come into effect.
2024-26: Capital outflows tax is reduced, from 4.75% currently.
Taxes 2022-23: High global oil prices reduce likelihood of tax rises.
2024-26: Government efforts to raise tax collection and tackle evasion continue, supporting revenue growth. However, tax system remains complex.
Financing 2022-23: Banking sector health improves, but political instability and global monetary tightening make credit more expensive, limiting access.
2024-26: Financing remains below potential, as public-sector financing needs curb long-term lending to the private sector.
The labour market 2022-23: Government lifts minimum wage and progressively reduces public wage bill to reduce fiscal spending.
2024-26: Quality of workforce remains poor. Labour reforms are slow to take effect. Educational outcomes remain weak.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Efforts to drum up large-scale foreign investment have only limited success.
2024-26: Renewed interest in port and airport development spurred by implementation of pro-business policies.
Technological readiness 2022-23: Public and private investments made to expand 4G broadband availability.
2024-26: Adoption of e-government services increases. 5G technology remains in its infancy.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
7.5 8.0 27 11 2 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Ecuador's score for the macroeconomic environment-the strongest area of its business environment by some distance-increases in the forecast period, and its relative rankings improve; in fact, it rises to the top of the regional rankings. This may seem unusual, given that the country has defaulted on its external debt a number of times (most recently in 2020), but the assessment for the macroeconomic environment emphasises underlying fundamentals, for which Ecuador scores comparatively well.

- Dollarisation keeps inflation low, reduces the risk of sharp currency volatility-a particular strength given the current context of global monetary tightening-and reduces (but does not eliminate) the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis. Although the public finances have been weak for some time, financing difficulties prevented the budget deficit from swelling too dramatically in 2020 (as happened in many other economies in the region). In addition, Ecuador's IMF programme has fiscal consolidation as a key condition; as a result, the public finances will maintain a small surplus throughout 2022-26, owing to high oil prices and a reduction in public spending. Although public debt has risen in recent years, an improvement in the budget balance will help to ease the public debt burden over the medium term.

Fiscal consolidation will hold back the recovery and could provoke unrest
- The downside of near-term fiscal consolidation is that GDP growth will recover more gradually than in economies where large-scale stimulus will facilitate a speedier rebound. We expect real GDP to return to pre-pandemic levels only in 2023, which is late by regional and global comparison. However, oil prices will be much higher in the forecast period-we expect West Texas Intermediate (WTI, a proxy for Ecuadorean oil export prices) to average US$86.7/barrel in the forecast period, compared with US$56/b in the historical period-which will support real GDP growth, the fiscal position and the external accounts. A downside risk is that rising political instability and social unrest could hold back progress on fiscal consolidation by putting the government under pressure to increase fuel subsidies or to roll back cuts to the public-sector wage bill. This would affect the budget balance, narrow the scope for reducing public debt and put the IMF programme at risk.
- Although our baseline forecast is that the government will adhere to the EFF, the risk that further policy concessions will worsen relations with the Fund has increased. This is particularly important given that Ecuador's public finances are still vulnerable and that high interest rates on its sovereign debt make restructuring debt in private capital markets unfeasible. On this basis, we believe that Mr Lasso will seek a new EFF to start in 2023, once the current programme ends in December 2022. Although the IMF has recognised that good progress has been under the current EFF and has shown flexibility regarding the fulfilment of some fiscal consolidation measures, it could refuse to sign another deal if it believes that prospects for reforms to be passed has worsened. In this scenario, or in the event that Mr Lasso is forced from office owing to opposition in the streets or in Congress and is succeeded by a less market-friendly figure, our score for the macroeconomic environment could well worsen.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.0 5.5 66 52 10 6
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Ecuador's score and rankings for policy towards private enterprise and competition improve in the 2022-26 forecast period. Despite opposition to public-private partnerships (PPPs) from Congress, reforms enacted by Mr Moreno and Mr Lasso have improved competition policy, reduced state subsidies and created more space for private enterprises in industries that were once dominated by the state, including mining and oil. Our baseline forecast is that Mr Lasso will use his executive powers to expand private participation in mining and hydrocarbons, although the pace of change is likely to be modest, in view of the June 2022 protests and stronger opposition within Congress. There will also be little progress on improving competition policy, as the Superintendencia de Control del Poder de Mercado (SCPM, the competition regulator) is likely to suffer from underfunding. As a result, monopolies and oligopolies will remain features of Ecuador's business environment, particularly in the cement, financial, supermarket and steel industries. Some improvements in efficiency are likely, but high levels of bureaucracy will constrain private investment and competition in 2022-26.
Price controls for fuels are likely to remain in place
- Although Mr Lasso will pursue the liberalisation of several price controls, we believe that most will remain in place amid public pressure. Certain goods and services-including fuel, electricity, agricultural chemicals, pharmaceuticals and telephone tariffs-are subject to government price controls, and limited price controls for some basic foodstuffs also exist. Government subsidies for fuel have traditionally put substantial strain on the budget. We expect that the fiscal cost of these will rise from 3% currently to 3.2% of GDP from 2023, in view of policy concessions made following the June protests; the government has agreed to cut fuel prices by US$0.10 per gallon, which will increase the amount that it spends on fuel subsidies. Further social unrest could lead to yet more subsidies.
- The Moreno government pushed for all major infrastructure projects to be developed with private-sector investment, primarily using PPP agreements. However, uptake of PPPs has been weak, partly because of shaky investor confidence related to legal insecurity, and partly because of a lack of personnel with the necessary resources to promote and support PPP development. The current PPP legislative framework is based on the Regulations for the Public-Private Partnership Regime; the Law of Incentives for PPPs and Foreign Investment; and the General Regulations for the Application of the Framework Law of Incentives for PPPs and Foreign Investment. These were all introduced in 2015-16 and essentially consist of tax breaks-including breaks from import tariffs and value-added tax (VAT) during project construction, as well as a ten-year reprieve from income tax and a reprieve from tax on the repatriation of profits. Mr Lasso introduced a bill to improve the PPP framework in April, but it was rejected, as legislators objected to the increased scope for the private sector to provide public services via PPPs and the privatisation of state assets.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.2 6.4 72 49 10 6
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Ecuador's score for policy towards foreign investment improves substantially in the 2022-26 period, and the country rises from 72nd to 49th position globally. The Lasso administration has maintained the previous government's willingness to engage with foreign investors in what is a substantial improvement compared with the hostility towards foreign investors displayed by Mr Correa. Broadly speaking, the government's commitment to crafting policy that gives foreign investors transparency, clarity and predictability will be stronger in 2022-26 than in 2017-21. Despite this improvement, policy towards foreign investment will remain a relatively low-scoring aspect of Ecuador's business environment. This is partly because the legislature is dominated by left-of-centre parties that have opposed the privatisation of state assets, complicating prospects for adopting deeper structural reforms that would improve the country's competitiveness. Powerful domestic vested interests will also continue to resist some of the government's reform efforts.

- Partly out of economic expediency, Mr Lasso has made it a policy priority to accelerate a trend towards ensuring a more stable foreign investment environment that began under his predecessor. To that end, he brought about Ecuador's return to the World Bank's International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) in September 2021, 12 years after Mr Correa withdrew the country. The return signalled a shift in the government's willingness to improve the investment environment. The ICSID has now concluded all of the legal disputes between foreign companies and the Ecuadorean government relating to Mr Correa's tenure; some of the proceedings had dragged on for many years and have only recently been settled. In 2018 legislation came into force that stipulated that disputes over investment agreements be resolved through arbitration. Even international arbitral decisions are now deemed immediately enforceable in Ecuador, without the need for further approval by domestic courts. The aim of this legislation was to allay investors' concerns about judicial security. However, given that foreign investors are often seeking long-term security as regards the official policy stance, radical shifts in administration in recent years-and Mr Lasso's own fairly tenuous hold on power-will remain a cause for concern. Even if policy towards foreign investment is more welcoming for now, there remains a risk of reversal under a future administration.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.4 7.3 60 57 8 8
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Ecuador's underlying score for foreign trade and exchange controls improves moderately in the forecast period, as does its global ranking, although its regional ranking remains unchanged. The country is likely to join the Pacific Alliance (a trade bloc comprising Chile, Peru, Colombia and Mexico) later this year. Mr Lasso will also work to diversify export markets by pursuing free-trade agreements (FTAs) with Ecuador's main trading partners in North America, Asia, Europe and Latin America. Eventual accession to the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) is also likely. Trade policy will remain open over the forecast period; we do not expect import or capital-account restrictions to be implemented.
Relations with the US will improve further under Mr Lasso
- Mr Lasso has made improving Ecuador's trade relationship with the US (its biggest export partner) a priority. In this regard, he will build on the Moreno administration's efforts to restore ties with the US following Mr Correa's decision in 2013 to withdraw from the Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA), which granted tariff-free access to the US market for about 6,000 goods. In December 2020 Mr Moreno signed an agreement with the US that included provisions to align regulatory oversight, harmonise customs procedures and boost bilateral trade between US and Ecuadorean small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Mr Lasso has been keen to begin negotiations on an FTA with the US, but talks are likely to take some time, as the sides will need to reach a consensus over thorny issues including market access for agricultural goods, labour standards and environmental policy. Our baseline forecast is that an FTA with the US will materialise, but only later on in the outlook period, and that the benefits will only be felt in the longer term.

Government will work to stabilise customs framework
- Some progress has been made in recent years in terms of streamlining customs procedures to improve efficiency; for example, the increased use of electronic procedures and automation has sped up the delivery of goods. However, corruption and drug-smuggling via overseas shipments will continue and may be fuelled by a recent increase in drug-trafficking operations. Given that tackling corruption is a priority for both the IMF and the US, Ecuador's government is likely to continue trying to crack down on corruption, particularly as regards public procurement processes and trade-related embezzlement. Frequent changes to customs duties have in the past acted as a major disincentive for legitimate businesses and have fuelled contraband trade; the Lasso government is likely to focus more keenly on stabilising the customs framework in 2022-26.
- We expect the Lasso administration to progressively reduce the capital outflows tax, as it deters foreign investment. The tax applies to all non-cash, hard-currency transactions of repatriated capital and transfers from banks to external accounts exceeding US$5,000. Mr Lasso presented a presidential decree in December 2021 that involved reducing the tax by 0.25 percentage points every three months over 2022, from 5% at end-2021. He had previously expressed an intention to phase out the tax completely, but this will depend on him remaining in office.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.3 6.1 62 52 7 3
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Ecuador's score and rankings for taxation improve in the forecast period. Official tax policy stance was volatile for part of the historical period and was vulnerable to abrupt changes in legislation to meet short-term financing needs. This fuelled uncertainty and posed a major impediment to investment. However, the situation began to change under the auspices of the IMF programme, and Mr Lasso's November 2021 tax reform created significant tax incentives aimed at attracting foreign investment. Companies making new investments can have their corporate taxes reduced by up to 5 percentage points and are exempt from foreign trade and capital outflows taxes. Although the tax reform will increase the fiscal incentives for investment, concerns about regulatory issues and political stability will remain major deterrents for businesses that are considering committing to long-term projects.

- The tax burden on larger companies will rise. As part of Mr Lasso's tax reform, they will have to pay temporary contributions until 2023, as a way of increasing government revenue. These companies have already had to deal with a December 2019 tax reform passed by the Moreno government, which included a 0.2% increase in the income tax rate of companies with annual revenue of above US$50m and which introduced an income tax on dividends distributed by resident companies to non-resident businesses or individuals.
- Aside from making changes to tax rates, Mr Lasso has sought to strengthen the tax system, for example by increasing the powers of the tax administration to combat widespread evasion and abuse of tax avoidance schemes; in May a reform allowed taxes to be filed electronically and invoices to be digitalised in order to reduce tax evasion. Over time the Servicio de Rentas Internas (SRI, the tax authority) is likely to improve its reputation as regards efficiency.

The government will resist IMF calls to increase the VAT rate
- At 12%, the VAT rate is more than 5 percentage points below the average in South America and 3 percentage points below the average in Latin America and the Caribbean. The Fund has recommended increasing the rate, but Mr Lasso will resist this, preferring to raise tax collection by clamping down on evasion and widening the tax base. The government's 2021 tax bill, which increased contributions for some businesses and high-income earners, encountered significant political backlash. If the government's efforts to increase tax inflows through increased collection fail, the Fund could press for increases in tax rates. However, we believe that the government is unlikely to do this willingly, in view of the social unrest that broke out in June 2022. There may be other changes to personal income taxes and consumption taxes (including further reductions in personal allowances and deductions) in order to lift the tax take later in the forecast period.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
3.6 5.1 73 67 9 8
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Ecuador's score for financing in 2022-26 rises markedly (from a low base), but as similarly ranked countries also make improvements, the change in its global position is less pronounced. State intervention in the banking sector used to be a feature of the business environment but is unlikely to be much of a risk in 2022-26. Mr Lasso-himself a former banker-has engendered greater confidence among commercial banks and their customers, which has spurred deposit and credit growth, albeit from a low level; total credit to the private sector was equivalent to 34% of GDP in 2021. However, numerous long-standing structural issues will complicate corporate access to finance. The banking sector remains underdeveloped relative to the size of the economy, accounting for just 3.8% of GDP in 2021, according to the Banco Central del Ecuador (BCE, the central bank). Financial services are relatively rudimentary, with a small secondary market and two stock exchanges (in Quito, the capital, and Guayaquil) vying for a limited pool of bond and equity issuances. In this context, financing is-and will remain-dominated by bank loans, with only large companies able to secure the lowest rates. Smaller companies face interest rates upwards of 12%, with loan maturities often capped at three years. Long-term bank finance and capital market finance remain underdeveloped and difficult to secure.

- The weak economic recovery from the pandemic-induced recession and the withdrawal of related support measures pose risks to the financial sector that could affect companies' ability to service loans or access credit. Financial soundness indicators remain reasonable for now, but profit ratios are low, meaning that firms could find it more difficult (or costly) to borrow if banks become more cautious about lending. This risk would be elevated if banks were to experience a run on deposits (the vast majority of which are still held in instant-access accounts). However, assuming that the economic recovery continues, this scenario is unlikely to materialise.
- Confidence in the banking system is tied to the management of reserve requirements at the BCE, which is central to sustaining dollarisation but has been the target of regulatory changes in the past. However, recent legislation to strengthen the central bank's authority will reduce the risk of more aggressive executive controls on bank deposits (which would weaken commercial bank lending and undermine market confidence more broadly). The recent legislation strengthens central bank autonomy by closing a loophole that allowed the funding of the government and by restoring a four-system balance-sheet structure (eliminated in 2008) that facilitates transparency.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.8 5.4 77 70 12 10
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Even though its underlying score and rankings improve in 2022-26, the labour market is still one of the weakest areas of Ecuador's business environment, reflecting a low-quality workforce and restrictive labour regulation. Strong opposition from legislators and the public will hold back Mr Lasso's efforts to increase labour flexibility.

- An increase in spending on education and training programmes during the 2006-14 oil boom failed to raise skills levels or productivity; lower oil prices in 2015-20 then necessitated cutbacks. Skills shortages and mismatches remain a problem, compounded by a lack of effective training programmes in both the public and private sectors. Even though Mr Lasso has emphasised the need to raise the quality of public education, fiscal constraints will limit the scope for improvements. Access to social security for some sectors of the population has increased, but the labour market remains highly informal, which will be difficult to tackle. Mr Lasso is hoping that an increase in private-sector investment will boost formal job creation, but we do not expect investment to rise enough to have a meaningful impact on reducing labour market informality until later in the forecast period (if at all). In comparative terms, labour costs will edge down slightly in 2022-26 but will remain high, particularly relative to productivity.

US dollar appreciation will compound competitiveness problems
- The strength of the US dollar will add to competitiveness problems in the short term (Ecuador's minimum wage is among the highest in Latin America in dollar terms, although it lags most of its neighbours in terms of productivity). Mr Lasso raised the monthly minimum wage for 2022 from US$400 to U$425. He has promised to increase it to US$500 by the end of his term, but this will aggravate the mismatch between wages and productivity even further.

Raising educational outcomes will be a slow and difficult process
- The government is seeking to expand access to education by reopening 900 schools that were shut in rural areas in 2013-16; improve the quality of education provision by increasing training opportunities; and boost digital skills by investing in computer equipment. It is also planning to reform the admissions system for higher education to make the process more equitable and to give universities more autonomy. However, efforts to improve education will progress only slowly, as the government's difficult fiscal position will preclude any significant increase in public spending. Structural problems in the education system will be difficult to rectify. Although net secondary school enrolment has risen in recent years, students perform less well than their regional peers. Raising standards will require a sustained commitment from the government; even assuming that the quality of education policymaking improves, student results are unlikely to pick up until the end of our 2022-26 forecast period.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.3 5.3 67 64 8 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Infrastructure was one of the stronger areas of Ecuador's business environment in the historical period. Although some improvements in 2022-26 are likely, these will be only moderate (reflecting fiscal constraints), meaning that Ecuador's global and regional rankings improve only marginally. A large public investment programme put in place by Mr Correa means that, following decades of underinvestment (and frequent electricity shortages), the quality of transport, energy and road infrastructure is now comparable with the Latin American median, and telecoms development (measured by mobile and internet penetration) is above the regional average. However, given the need for fiscal consolidation, the government will rein in efforts to modernise infrastructure. The authorities will seek to attract private investment for infrastructure projects, but Ecuador lacks the solid track record of fostering successful PPPs that have enabled infrastructure upgrades in other countries in the region. A proposal by Mr Lasso that sought to make PPPs more attractive was rejected in Congress.

- A major focus of infrastructure investment has been the development of new hydroelectric power plants to avoid importing costly energy for gas-fired and thermoelectric plants. In the medium term, there is potential to expand energy exports. However, there are (valid) concerns that hydroelectric plants will fall short of expected generation levels owing to design issues and potentially misleading estimates about capacity, which could result in supply bottlenecks and make electricity imports necessary.
- Recent investment has led to road infrastructure improvements and the creation of new road networks. This should help to boost domestic and intraregional trade, but it will also create challenges including congestion, as advances in traffic management have been more limited. Moreover, seasonal heavy rains that are costly and difficult to mitigate cause seasonal disruption in some areas. There has been much slower progress on developing mass transport systems to relieve urban congestion, including an underground rail system in Quito that began construction in 2012 but has been repeatedly delayed (and is now likely to open in late 2022) and a tram project in Cuenca (the third-largest city), which was delayed but finally began operating in mid-2020.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
3.3 3.5 74 75 10 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Although Ecuador's score for technological readiness improves in 2022-26, it does so only marginally; faster progress elsewhere means that it falls slightly in the global and regional rankings. A global position of 75th makes this area the weakest aspect of Ecuador's business environment; the poor result reflects low smartphone penetration and a lack of spending on research and innovation, which undermine the overall score. Despite these weaknesses, Ecuador scores relatively well for e-commerce preparedness and for cyber-security.
Internet access and penetration will improve over the forecast period
- The Lasso administration will seek to accelerate efforts to expand the telecoms and IT sectors. Internet access through mobile phones will drive wider mobile-phone usage during the outlook period as handsets and data tariffs become more affordable and mobile phones are used increasingly in place of personal computers (PCs). We expect data services to be the fastest-growing segment of the mobile market. However, coverage remains inadequate and costs are high, limiting access. Despite efforts to improve competition in the mobile market, a complicated regulatory environment for foreign companies will remain impediments. Internet penetration, particularly of broadband, has been limited, but we expect it to grow over the forecast period as the technology becomes more widely available and connectivity improves. The number of overall internet subscriptions will continue to rise.
- The expansion of 4G technology has been relatively slow, even by regional standards. The Correa government imposed high costs on new contracts for mobile-telephony firms in 2008, which slowed the rollout as companies had to work to recover costs. Smartphone adoption has been relatively slow, reflecting low income levels and high tariffs on imported handsets (which were classified as luxury goods under Mr Correa). In July 2019 the Moreno government launched a programme called Ecuador Digital, which aimed to raise penetration (particularly in rural areas), improve internet speeds, expand 4G broadband and accelerate the allocation of new telecoms bandwidth. The current government will continue these efforts, offering incentives for the private sector to boost 4G coverage more rapidly. In March 2021 the Corporación Nacional de Telecomunicaciones (CNT, the state telecoms provider) signed an agreement with Nokia (Finland) to begin rolling out 5G throughout Ecuador, although progress will be limited over the 2022-26 forecast period.
- Rising internet penetration and smartphone usage will foster growth in online retail, albeit from a low base. The Cámara Ecuatoriana de Comercio Electrónico (CECE, the e-commerce chamber) forecasts that e-commerce sales will increase by 25% year on year in 2022, to US$4bn. E-commerce operations have increased significantly since 2020, when pandemic-related shop closures caused demand for e-commerce to soar.
- A dramatic rise in internet banking has aided the growth of e-commerce. Digital transactions increased by 161% between 2019 and 2021, to US$135.9bn, according to the Asociación de Bancos del Ecuador (Asobanca, the private banks association). This is larger than the country's GDP and is greater than the volume of transactions in physical banks. However, the number of people who make digital transactions remains low, at just 4.3m (although this number has risen sharply from 1.2m in 2019), and is skewed heavily in favour of younger users. Growth in digital transactions was driven primarily by the covid-19 pandemic, as the use of cash and physical transactions was perceived as more difficult and risky, but it is a trend that we expect to continue even after the pandemic.

Economic forecast: Policy trends The main economic policy priority of the president, Guillermo Lasso, will be to continue macroeconomic adjustment to reduce default risk and comply with the 27-month extended fund facility (EFF) agreement with the IMF that was signed in 2020 under the former president, Lenín Moreno (2017-21). In September 2021 the Lasso administration reached an agreement with the Fund to continue the EFF, reflecting a commitment to the deal's original objectives: putting the public finances on a stable trajectory; improving fiscal transparency; and strengthening the independence of the Banco Central del Ecuador (BCE, the central bank).
Another priority will be to contain accelerating inflation, which has been aggravated by the Russia-Ukraine war. Tackling inflation-and its impact on disposable incomes-is particularly important for the government, given that rising living costs have been an important trigger of the nationwide social protests. Mr Lasso has responded by increasing monthly cash transfers to poor households (from US$50 to US$55), and by pledging to control price speculation and to subsidise fertilisers for small farms. There is a risk that social unrest could force him to adopt additional measures, and although it is likely that the Fund will display some leniency given the circumstances, fiscal pressures could ultimately put the EFF at risk.
Advancing market-friendly reforms-another important agenda item-will prove increasingly tricky, given that Mr Lasso's position in Congress is weak. This was clear in March, when the legislature rejected his investment promotion bill that sought to allow the creation of public-private partnerships (PPPs) and free-trade zones (FTZs). Reforms that require legislative approval, such as modifying financial regulations, are now on hold, but Mr Lasso is likely to push ahead in areas where he has executive freedom, for example by opening up the oil industry to foreign investors (although this issue brings with it a high risk of disagreements with indigenous groups and ensuing protests). On the campaign trail, Mr Lasso pledged to raise the minimum wage by a substantial 25%. Increments will probably be spread over his term; he took his first step in this regard in December, with a 6.2% rise-the most substantial since 2014.
Notwithstanding domestic obstacles, Mr Lasso is likely to maintain good relations with the IMF. The Fund has responded positively to Ecuador's progress on strengthening its public finances, although it said that more action was needed on implementing structural reforms and improving fiscal transparency. However, weak popular support for austerity poses risks to the implementation of these reforms. Assuming that Mr Lasso does not abandon IMF targets altogether in the face of unrest, EIU expects strong communication between the Lasso government and the Fund to result in continued multilateral support. We have not yet pencilled another IMF lending arrangement into our forecasts after the current EFF ends in December 2022 (the finance minister, Simón Cueva, is due to give an update on this soon), but the likelihood of the government seeking a renewal is increasing, given that we expect US interest rates to rise substantially, making external financing more expensive for Ecuador.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Government revenue 36.1 34.7 34.4 34.9 34.9 35.2
Government expenditure 37.6 34.7 33.6 33.6 33.7 34.1
Budget balance -1.5 0.0 0.8 1.3 1.2 1.1
Although Mr Lasso may well yield to some of the pressure for increased spending or tax reductions amid a damaging inflation spike, he will remain committed to restoring health to the public finances after years of fiscal deficits. His first tax reform, passed in late 2021, reduced the level of tax deductions that can be made by those earning more than US$2,000 per month, and imposed an extra levy on individuals and firms with assets worth more than US$1m and US$5m respectively. Mr Lasso will also try to boost revenue by selling concessions of state assets, including refineries and the state-owned telecoms firm.
The government will be assisted in its fiscal efforts by an oil windfall; prices have surged since Russia invaded Ukraine in February. According to the finance ministry, each US$1/barrel increase in oil prices raises government revenue by US$50m (after subsidies). We expect the government to spend much of this additional revenue on subsidies, and on improving and repairing infrastructure. It will probably also use some to support consumers in the face of rapid price increases (it has already taken some small steps, for example by increasing cash transfers). Nevertheless, we forecast that the non-financial public-sector (NFPS) balance will post a small surplus in 2022 and remain in surplus in 2023-26, averaging 1.5% of GDP. We also expect the public debt/GDP ratio to fall over the medium term (from a peak of 63.6% in 2020), dipping below 50% by end-2024. Risks to these assumptions are all political.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Lending rate (av) 8.1 7.3 7.5 7.6 7.8 8.0
Deposit rate (av) 5.6 5.6 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.0
As a dollarised economy, Ecuador lacks independent monetary policy and is therefore unable to use certain levers to support its recovery. In this context, monetary conditions will be determined largely by external factors, particularly the position taken by the Federal Reserve (Fed, the US central bank), but real local rates will remain elevated, partly reflecting Ecuador's high risk premium. Crucially, the BCE will not use international reserves to finance government spending-a policy that would threaten monetary and financial stability.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Economic growth (%)
US GDP 5.7 2.3 1.3 1.4 1.9 2.0
OECD GDP 5.2 2.5 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.9
World GDP 5.7 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.6
World trade 10.9 4.3 4.2 3.8 3.6 3.6
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 4.7 7.7 3.7 1.6 2.1 2.1
OECD CPI 3.6 7.8 3.8 2.4 2.3 2.2
Manufactures (measured in US$) 5.8 2.8 2.2 3.2 2.4 1.6
Oil (WTI; US$/b) 68.0 104.2 92.9 84.7 76.9 74.8
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 37.9 23.7 -6.1 -7.6 -4.2 -3.4
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.1 1.5 3.2 2.8 2.7 2.7
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP 4.2 2.5 2.1 1.9 1.3 1.9
Private consumption 10.2 2.0 1.8 1.3 1.0 2.2
Government consumption -1.7 0.3 -0.8 0.7 -1.2 -1.2
Gross fixed investment 4.3 4.2 5.1 3.8 2.8 2.6
Exports of goods & services -0.1 6.2 5.1 4.3 4.3 4.4
Imports of goods & services 13.2 4.0 3.6 4.0 3.8 3.6
Domestic demand 8.1 1.9 1.7 1.8 1.2 1.6
Agriculture 3.4 0.2 1.8 2.1 2.2 2.3
Industry 0.5 2.8 1.6 1.0 1.0 1.0
Services 5.8 2.8 2.4 2.3 1.3 2.3
The economy will continue returning towards its pre-pandemic level in 2022 but will fall short of a full recovery. Growth was fairly weak in 2021, at just 4.2%, despite a 7.8% contraction in 2020. However, activity was much stronger than expected in the first quarter of this year; along with the boom in oil prices, this has led us to revise up our real GDP growth forecast for 2022 significantly, to 3.5%. We expect private consumption growth to decelerate to 3.8%, owing to a high base of comparison, although that growth rate is still high relative to the past decade. Consumption will be driven by higher salaries (on the back of a substantial minimum-wage increase) and a partial recovery in employment. Furthermore, the oil windfall will spur growth via higher government revenue and incomes. We expect gross fixed investment to expand by 4.2% (a similar rate to 2021) but to remain below its pre-pandemic level in real terms.
We forecast average annual real GDP growth of just less than 2% in 2023-26, driven by private consumption and investment. A combination of strong commodity exports and high demand for the imported materials needed for capital investment will mean that the contribution made by the external account will be fairly neutral in 2023-26. Government consumption will not be a major driver of growth, as the administration will try to keep spending contained.
There are several risks to our GDP forecasts, on both the upside and downside. A further spike in oil prices would be a net positive for growth, although it would also raise the potential for more damaging protests related to high living costs that would hit investment and activity. Another upside risk to growth stems from the possibility that the government will be able to accelerate job creation and drive down under-employment by increasing labour market flexibility, although we currently expect market-friendly reforms to run aground in the opposition-dominated Congress. Downside risks, meanwhile, stem from the outlook for the global economy, given that growth prospects for the US, China and Europe are all weakening. The threat posed by covid-19 has not gone away altogether either, and the emergence of a vaccine-resistant variant could still disrupt business operations.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends Notwithstanding the Lasso administration's efforts to diversify the economy, the oil sector will remain critically important, accounting for about 10% of Ecuador's GDP. Oil-related earnings (including sales of crude oil and refined fuels such as petrol) have been boosted by soaring oil prices, particularly since the start of the Russia-Ukraine war, and should represent about 25% of total government revenue in 2022. Given that average global oil prices will be higher in the forecast period than in our 2017-21 historical period, oil sales are likely to be a significant driver behind improvements in Ecuador's public finances.
However, Mr Lasso's promise to double oil output to 1m barrels/day by 2025 looks increasingly unlikely to be met. Production has averaged less than 500,000 b/d for the past two years, owing to long-standing underinvestment and supply disruptions caused by natural disasters and social unrest. Social protests constitute a particularly serious risk to the production outlook, as indigenous groups will continue to disrupt activity at oilfields to gain leverage in negotiations with the government. Mr Lasso signed new decrees in July and August 2021 aimed at streamlining regulations and-particularly importantly-incentivising private-sector investment via production-sharing agreements with Petroecuador (the state-owned oil firm). However, private firms have been slow to respond. Furthermore, delays and pressure from environmental and social groups will temper production ambitions. In the meantime, progress on improving the management of Petroecuador has proven slow.
Growth in the oil sector will come primarily from increased production at the 1.6bn-barrel, heavy crude Ishpingo-Tambococha-Tiputini (ITT) oilfield. The merger of Petroecuador with Petroamazonas (another oil state company) in 2021 is likely to increase efficiency and enable the further development of the ITT oilfield, as there used to be disagreements between the firms regarding pipeline infrastructure. A factor that will hold back progress, however, is that Mr Lasso has sought to assuage environmental concerns about his production ambitions by backing an audit of oil operations in the Yasuní national park, where the ITT oilfield is located. He also supports the use of environmental impact assessments as a way of improving transparency. Although this may help to improve compliance and valuations, it is likely to preclude a faster expansion of production.
Mining sector enters growth phase, but obstacles persist The mining sector will gain in prominence over the medium term. It will become increasingly important for the state finances and is poised to expand, as two major mining projects driven by foreign investors-Fruta del Norte (a gold mine) and Mirador (primarily a copper mine)-came on stream in late 2019. Fruta del Norte generated US$733m in sales last year, as production increased by 77%. The BCE projects that export earnings from the mine will average US$703m per year in 2022-30, providing the country with a steady inflow of US dollars. Operations at the mine will continue for about 13 years, although continued exploration in the area could extend its lifetime. Mirador is also ramping up production and will generate an annual average of US$1.1bn per year in export revenue in 2022-30. The sector will continue to expand over the forecast period-buoyed by the removal in 2019 of a 70% "windfall tax" on mining profits-as a series of other projects attract major mining companies that will compete for stakes.
The Lasso government will attempt to balance its efforts to boost investment in the mining sector with the need to address environmental and social opposition to new projects. Lingering legal uncertainties and local resistance will persist, as underscored by a February 2021 referendum in which voters in Cuenca (Ecuador's third-largest city) overwhelmingly voted to prohibit large-scale mining in the groundwater recharge zones of five local rivers. Friction between local communities and mining firms is likely to weigh on investment, despite government attempts to design a framework that encourages private sector participation in the sector. Many mineral deposits are located in environmentally sensitive areas, close to communities that have lodged complaints with local courts, alleging that mining firms have failed to undertake consultation processes. Nevertheless, a lack of cohesion among anti-mining activists and differences in opinion within Ecuador make it unlikely that major mining projects that are currently under construction or are undertaking advanced exploration will be cancelled any time soon.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Consumer prices (av) 0.1 3.9 3.0 2.2 2.1 1.6
Real wages -0.1 0.6 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.5
Our central forecast assumes that 12-month consumer price inflation will peak in the coming months, before starting to trend down to 4.6% at end-2022, which would be the fastest end-year rate since 2011. Price pressures are mainly on the supply side, in the form of rises in global prices for energy and agricultural commodities. Although the government has reimposed a freeze on low-octane fuel prices, high-octane fuel has become more expensive, and higher prices for food products and inputs, such as fertiliser, will generate faster inflation. Global supply-chain problems, which are limiting the availability of numerous manufactured goods and pushing their prices higher, will also take longer to be resolved in the light of the Russia-Ukraine war. Although price pressures will moderate in 2023, we still expect inflation to remain relatively high in that year, owing to continued supply-chain challenges and high commodity prices. However, the dollarised nature of Ecuador's economy will help to dampen inflation, especially as the US raises interest rates. On this basis, we expect inflation to average 2.2% per year in 2023-26-slightly slower than in 2010-19.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
Exchange rate US$:€ (end-period) 1.13 1.12 1.18 1.22 1.24 1.25
Exchange rate US$:¥100 (av) 0.91 0.79 0.76 0.77 0.82 0.85
Real effective exchange-rate index (1997=100; av) 112.4 113.4 112.5 110.8 109.4 108.4
Purchasing power parity LCU:US$ (av) 0.51 0.49 0.49 0.48 0.48 0.47
We expect dollarisation to be maintained in 2022-26. De-dollarisation remains a highly unlikely political move, given strong support for the exchange-rate regime on the basis that it promotes macroeconomic stability. We expect the government to remain committed to restoring health to the public finances, building up reserves and seeking to strengthen the BCE's independence. Multilateral and bilateral financing will help to assuage concerns about financing and liquidity amid limited access to international capital markets.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Current-account balance 3.0 4.0 3.6 2.9 3.1 2.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.8 3.6 3.1 2.4 2.5 1.7
Goods: exports fob 27.2 34.4 36.4 38.1 40.6 41.8
Goods: imports fob -24.0 -30.3 -32.0 -34.2 -36.4 -38.5
Trade balance 3.3 4.1 4.3 3.9 4.2 3.3
Services: credit 2.1 2.5 2.7 3.0 3.3 3.7
Services: debit -4.6 -4.9 -5.3 -5.7 -6.1 -6.4
Services balance -2.5 -2.4 -2.6 -2.7 -2.8 -2.8
Primary income: credit 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4
Primary income: debit -1.7 -2.4 -3.3 -3.3 -3.4 -3.6
Primary income balance -1.7 -2.2 -2.9 -2.9 -3.1 -3.2
Secondary income: credit 4.8 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0
Secondary income: debit -1.0 -1.0 -1.1 -1.1 -1.1 -1.2
Secondary income balance 3.9 4.6 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9
We are optimistic about the external accounts during the forecast period and expect a string of current-account surpluses. Continued growth in exports, high oil prices and a deceleration in import growth should support the trade balance in 2022, driving the current-account surplus up to 3.8% of GDP-a two-decade high. Thereafter, mining exports will gain momentum, helping to maintain a trade surplus, even though global oil prices (and the revenue derived from oil exports) will fall. Current-account surpluses and multilateral financing (particularly from the Fund) will bolster the BCE's foreign-exchange reserves, providing a cushion against adverse fiscal and financial shocks. We expect reserves to rise to about 3.5 months of import cover by end-2026, compared with an average of 1.8 months in 2010-20. Although Mr Lasso plans to increase private investment, we remain sceptical that this will materialise quickly and expect foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows to remain weak in 2022-26, averaging just 0.7% of GDP, and concentrated in extractive industries. An upside risk to our FDI projections is that Mr Lasso's policy agenda proves more successful than we currently expect.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Ecuador Stocks and flows Ecuador has historically attracted little foreign direct investment (FDI). Annual inflows averaged US$700m in 1994-2008, driven mainly by the oil sector (which accounted for 80% of the total). After barely breaching US$1bn (1.8% of GDP) in 2008, FDI inflows fell to US$165m in 2010. They recovered to an average of US$774m (0.8% of GDP) in 2011-17, during the presidency of Rafael Correa (2007-17), although his policies caused investor confidence to weaken. FDI inflows rose at the margin under Lenín Moreno (2017-21), reflecting a more conciliatory approach to the private sector, but inflows remained low, averaging 1% of GDP during his term. Given that FDI inflows were already fairly weak before the pandemic, there was less of a discernible effect on FDI in Ecuador than in other countries; inflows reached US$1.1bn (1.1% of GDP) in 2020. EIU estimates that the total stock of inward FDI was US$21.4bn at end-2021. This is one of the smallest stocks among major Latin American economies, equating to 20.2% of GDP. The outlook for FDI is brighter in the 2022-26 forecast period than in the 2017-21 historical period, as the current government, led by Guillermo Lasso, is open to foreign investment. Nonetheless, weaknesses in the business environment, rising political instability and investor wariness about the policy direction under future administrations will dampen growth in inflows.
Origin and distribution US firms (historically Ecuador's main source of FDI) disinvested in the country in 2008-10, largely owing to uncertainty over oil contract renegotiations and the global financial crisis. US investment has since stabilised, averaging 12% of inflows in 2017-21. Chinese FDI rose after bilateral trade and diplomatic ties strengthened in 2011, but inflows have moderated to an average of 12% of inflows in 2017-21, from 23% in 2010-15. There is a clear link between sources of FDI and the sectors that receive it. For example, almost half of FDI in 2017-21 went into mining and hydrocarbons: the fact that 29% of foreign investment originated from Canada in 2019 is therefore unsurprising, as the major Fruta del Norte gold mine is owned by a Canadian firm. The manufacturing, agri- and aqua-culture, and retail sectors also attract foreign investment.
Determinants Historically, FDI into Ecuador has been primarily resource-seeking, given the country's natural resource endowment, particularly in the hydrocarbons industry. However, policy uncertainty and an unreliable business environment have constrained investment. Moreover, weak institutions, a small domestic market, a relatively high cost of labour and low income levels still deter market-seeking or efficiency-seeking investments. The Lasso administration has significantly stepped up efforts to attract private foreign investment by providing tax incentives and increasing legal certainty. This trend started under the previous government, which focused on fomenting investment in the extractive sectors, reintroducing production-sharing contracts and eliminating a 70% "windfall tax" on profits in mining. However, this has not yet translated into an increase in investor interest, as the still-uncertain regulatory and legal environment, the pandemic-induced macroeconomic shock, and electoral uncertainty in 2021 have tempered foreign investment. Investments are likely to remain focused in natural resources, even assuming that the business environment strengthens moderately.
Impact The impact of inward FDI on productivity and export competitiveness has been limited because most investment has been directed towards capital-intensive natural resource sectors, which have weak links to the rest of the economy. However, FDI has helped to boost export earnings in the energy sector and to create indirect employment.
Potential The country's strong endowments of natural resources will be attractive to foreign investors. There are notable FDI opportunities in Ecuador's oil, mining, manufacturing and services sectors. Although policy uncertainty, infrastructure deficiencies and low labour productivity pose problems, we expect the business environment to improve under the auspices of the IMF, which will slowly make the country more competitive. A more pragmatic approach to attracting private foreign capital and a continuing shift away from the unorthodox macroeconomic policies of Mr Correa's government will also boost the country's attractiveness in the medium term. Nevertheless, political instability, ingrained opposition from powerful domestic interest groups and from social groups, will complicate efforts to open up investment opportunities in the oil sector. Sluggishness in consumption and a tepid post-pandemic recovery will also deter investment.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2016 2021 2026
Population (m)
Total 16.5 17.7 18.7
 Male 8.3 8.9 9.3
 Female 8.3 8.9 9.3
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 27.4 25.3 23.4
 15-64 65.3 66.2 66.6
 65+ 7.3 8.5 9.9
Young-age dependency ratio 0.42 0.38 0.35
Old-age dependency ratio 0.11 0.13 0.15
Working-age population (m) 10.8 11.7 12.4
Urbanisation (% of total) 63.5 64.3 65.1
Labour force (m) 7.9 8.6 9.4
       
Period averages   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth (%)   1.4 1.0
Working-age population growth (%)   1.7 1.2
Labour force growth (%)   1.8 1.7
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   20.1 18.7
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   5.1 5.2
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   19.3 17.3
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   73.7 74.8
 Female   79.3 80.3
 Average   76.5 77.5
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; EIU estimates and forecasts; national statistics.
Population growth is slowing but is still high relative to developed countries Population growth will continue to slow (as has been occurring over the past decades), owing to a falling birth rate and continued-albeit lower-emigration. However, at an annual average of 1% per year in the 2022-26 forecast period, growth will be high compared with developed-country standards and above the regional average. In 2021 the population reached an estimated 17.7m and is expected to rise to 18.7m by 2024. The urbanisation rate of is relatively high; about 64% of the population lives in urban centres, compared with 55% in 1990. EIU expects this percentage to rise to about 65% by 2026. Almost half of city dwellers reside either in the capital, Quito, or in the largest city and main business centre, Guayaquil. Rapid urbanisation over the past 50 years has increased the level of informality, as the creation of full-time jobs has risen much more slowly. Unemployment stood at 4.05% in the second quarter of 2022-below the rate of 4.5% in the same period of 2019. Although this points to a recovery from the covid-19 shock, the quality of jobs has deteriorated, and the rate of adequate employment is still below pre-pandemic standards. We expect the labour force to continue to expand faster than the overall population during the forecast period. Notwithstanding efforts by the current government, led by Guillermo Lasso, to boost the creation of formal jobs, the formal economy will struggle to absorb new entrants, particularly as diversification away from the energy-dominant labour market will be slow (and will focus primarily on mining and agriculture). Informal employment, which the government estimates at 51.6% of the labour force as at June 2022, is therefore likely to stay high.
Government will struggle to integrate Venezuelan migrants The Lasso government's efforts to step up the regularisation of Venezuelan migrants should increase the size of the labour force marginally, although it will also increase competition for low-skilled jobs, putting downward pressure on job quality and wages, particularly for young Ecuadoreans who only have primary education. Ecuador has taken in more than 450,000 migrants from Venezuela, and successive governments have struggled to integrate them into the formal job market, especially given the economic shock from the pandemic. The country's slow economic recovery may well deter Venezuelan migration in the 2022-26 forecast period, as Venezuelans will be more attracted to stronger neighbouring economies.
We expect Ecuador's crude birth rate to fall to an annual average of 18.7 per 1,000 population in 2022-26 (down from 20.1 in the 2017-21 historical period). Meanwhile, the crude death rate will hold fairly steady, at an annual average of 5.2 per 1,000 population in 2022-26. The old-age dependency ratio, which will rise slightly, to 0.15 by 2026, will remain low by developed-country standards. However, given constraints on public spending, an ageing population will put growing pressure on an already heavily indebted social security system, especially as the pandemic laid bare the many deficiencies in healthcare provision. Mr Lasso is planning to reduce the government's historical debt to the state-run social security institute, given that this has seriously hampered its capacity, but doing so will not be easy, and the social security system will continue to be constrained by the unpaid arrears due to it.
Progress in improving healthcare and education standards will be slow The precarious state of the public finances will hinder improvements in education and healthcare standards. Strong oil revenue during the 2000s commodity boom helped to reduce poverty levels and improve social indicators following decades of underinvestment. However, even though education and healthcare now account for a much larger share of public spending than they did in the past, standards are still fairly low. Some of this can be attributed a reversal of progress caused by the 2015-16 recession; further slippage is likely in the wake of the covid-19 crisis, as opportunities for out-of-school learning were limited. Regular labour conflicts with public healthcare and education workers-often resulting in industrial action-have hampered improvements in the quality of services. The 2008 constitution promised free universal healthcare and education, but the government will struggle to deliver on this given its straitened fiscal circumstances. Improvements in education and healthcare standards will be only gradual, with progress crippled by narrow scope for raising spending.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Population (m) 17.7 17.9 18.1 18.3 18.5 18.7
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 106.2 110.7 116.4 120.4 123.7 127.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 5,992 6,176 6,425 6,580 6,695 6,801
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 208.6 226.7 239.8 248.6 257.2 267.5
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 11,774 12,652 13,239 13,590 13,917 14,330
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 65.2 69.5 73.5 76.5 79.1 81.8
Household consumption (US$ bn) 65.2 69.0 72.4 75.0 77.3 79.7
Household consumption per head (US$) 3,680 3,850 4,000 4,100 4,180 4,270
Exports of goods & services (% change) -0.1 6.2 5.1 4.3 4.3 4.4
Imports of goods & services (% change) 13.2 4.0 3.6 4.0 3.8 3.6
Ecuador is one of the smallest markets included in EIU's business environment rankings, accounting for about 0.1% of global GDP and a similar share of global exports. The country's oil and mineral reserves will continue to attract interest from foreign investors. The policy stance of the government led by the president, Guillermo Lasso, will encourage interest in the country, but questions about long-term policy predictability and difficulties inherent in making material improvements to the business environment are likely to preclude a sharp increase in private investment.
Ecuador's market will expand but only modestly Boosted by a rising population but hindered by slow economic growth (partly owing to limited fiscal support during the covid-19 crisis), Ecuador's market will expand modestly in the 2022-26 forecast period. GDP per head, estimated at US$6,261 in 2019, fell sharply in 2020, to US$5,643, and is forecast to reach only US$6,801 in 2026. This slow recovery will restrict business opportunities. Households appear to have suffered long-lasting damage from the covid-19 shock, as the rate of adequate employment is still more than 4 percentage points below pre-pandemic levels. Given that the poverty rate stands at 27.7% (above the 25% pre-pandemic level), market growth will remain constrained. Moreover, Ecuador's per-head income figures will continue to disguise wide inequalities. Although consumption will rise following a fall in 2020, we expect reductions in income inequality to be marginal at best in 2022-26.
The government of a former president, Rafael Correa (2007-17), channelled the proceeds from the 2006-14 oil price boom into upgrading Ecuador's underdeveloped infrastructure. Substantial improvements were made, particularly to the road system, but there are still significant gaps. Mr Correa's successor, Lenín Moreno (2017-21), was unable to do the same owing to the need for fiscal adjustment, and instead attempted to incentivise private investment in infrastructure, but he had only limited success. The Lasso administration will endeavour to bridge infrastructure gaps by improving the legal framework to boost domestic and foreign investment, notably in the export-oriented energy and mining sectors, and related services. We expect some progress, although political instability will be a constraining factor. However, despite Ecuador's strong natural resource endowment, export growth will remain below potential, and its share of world exports will stagnate at about 0.1%
As a result of dollarisation and successive years of guaranteeing a "living wage" (essentially a minimum wage), Ecuador is no longer a cheap-labour investment location. In US dollar terms, the country has one of the highest minimum wages in Latin America. Also weighing on the country's competitiveness are low skills levels. However, dollarisation provides investors with greater overall macroeconomic stability, particularly by reducing inflation and exchange-rate risks. Investment in most areas outside the oil sector will be slow to arrive, as improvements to the business environment will be only incremental, given political hurdles amid a highly fragmented political landscape. At the same time, progress on improving the transparency and efficiency of the judicial system will be slow to materialise.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 15,061 16,462 17,443 17,650 17,745 17,801
Housing & household fuels 5,409 5,685 5,909 6,081 6,235 6,381
Clothing & footwear 5,012 5,178 5,260 5,382 5,438 5,544
Household goods & services 3,819 3,953 4,071 4,186 4,249 4,351
Health 4,784 5,007 5,186 5,316 5,426 5,527
Transport & communications 12,695 13,512 14,217 14,780 15,290 15,783
Leisure & education 6,772 7,271 7,501 7,651 7,773 7,884
Hotels & restaurants 5,187 5,691 5,998 6,128 6,235 6,334
Other 6,426 7,385 8,385 9,416 10,532 11,761
Total 65,165 70,144 73,972 76,590 78,922 81,367
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 23.1 23.5 23.6 23.0 22.5 21.9
Housing & household fuels 8.3 8.1 8.0 7.9 7.9 7.8
Clothing & footwear 7.7 7.4 7.1 7.0 6.9 6.8
Household goods & services 5.9 5.6 5.5 5.5 5.4 5.3
Health 7.3 7.1 7.0 6.9 6.9 6.8
Transport & communications 19.5 19.3 19.2 19.3 19.4 19.4
Leisure & education 10.4 10.4 10.1 10.0 9.8 9.7
Hotels & restaurants 8.0 8.1 8.1 8.0 7.9 7.8
Other 9.9 10.5 11.3 12.3 13.3 14.5
Business opportunities limited by low level of development As disposable incomes only recover gradually from the covid-19 crisis, a shift in consumer attitudes towards cheaper brands and lower-cost, high-volume outlets is likely in the near term. Over the medium to long term, we expect purchasing power to pick up from a trough in 2020 as labour market conditions improve. As incomes rise, a smaller proportion of real disposable income will be spent on food and housing, shifting instead to consumer durables and other high-ticket items. The proportion of income spent on leisure and education, hotels and restaurants, and other high-end goods will remain low. Ecuador's market will remain relatively small, hindered by slow economic development.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2021   2026  
  Ecuador Latin America (av) Ecuador Latin America (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 8.9 8.3 8.6 8.3
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 532 695 588 907
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 18.6 13.9 16.5 12.5
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.8
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 23.1 27.5 22.1 26.9
Meat consumption (kg per person) 50.8 78.1 52.0 82.5
Milk consumption (litres per person) 138.0 135.0 139.0 140.0
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 0.3 3.4 0.3 3.6
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 70 222 75 244
Telephone main lines 114 157 101 149
Mobile phone subscribers 900 1,050 976 1,140
Television sets – 707 – 806
Personal computers 493 491 567 648
Households
No. of households (m) 3.3 131.8 3.3 136.0
No. of people per household (av) 5.4 3.7 5.7 3.7
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 13,540 15,550 15,490 20,700
Average monthly wage (US$) 586 469 721 607
Gini index 47.3 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); EIU estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population 1.01 0.67 0.78
Working-age population 1.21 0.49 0.72
Working-age minus total population 0.19 -0.17 -0.06
Labour force 1.73 0.36 0.78
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 0.9 1.1 1.0
Growth of real GDP 1.9 1.8 1.8
Labour productivity growth 0.2 1.4 1.0
Growth of capital stock 1.7 2.1 2.0
Total factor productivity growth 0.1 0.8 0.6
Ample scope for catch-up, but challenges persist Low levels of productivity and a wealth of natural resources give Ecuador scope to catch up with more developed countries, provided that policies are implemented to transform its resource wealth into productive investment in other sectors. Although we expect Ecuador to benefit from dollarisation and incremental improvements to the business environment, poor prospects for significant improvements to institutions do not bode well for a more stable economic policy direction. Assuming that structural deficiencies, obstacles to governability and inconsistent policymaking decisions endure, long-term investment is likely to be lacking and income levels will continue to trail developed-country levels. On this basis, EIU expects Ecuador's per-head GDP to be only 17% of that of the US (in purchasing power parity terms) in 2050-unchanged from 2021.
Initial conditions: Rapid urbanisation in the past 30 years and faster integration into the world economy have produced few long-term benefits for the population. Political instability, weak institutions and high levels of poverty and inequality-combined with an overdependence on oil-have yielded a rent-seeking and unproductive economy that is plagued by low education levels and productivity, and by high labour informality. The government of Rafael Correa (2007-17) sought to address low social indicators and improve infrastructure, but failed to boost private investment and savings. His government also harmed the legal framework for investment by constantly changing regulations and putting up hurdles to capital, and engendered large macroeconomic imbalances. The next administration, led by Lenín Moreno (2017-21) and the current one, led by Guillermo Lasso, have tried to correct those imbalances, aided by a US$6.5bn deal with the IMF. Although dollarisation, which was adopted in 2000, has shielded the public finances from inflation and devaluation risk, it has also made Ecuador less competitive and has not prevented fiscal mismanagement. Moreover, full dollarisation also limits Ecuador's sources of financing, as the country cannot issue local-currency debt or resort to seignorage revenue.
Demographic trends: Population growth is set to fall gradually over the long term, from an average of 1.2% in 2020-30, to 0.8% in 2031-50. The main driver of this trend will be lower fertility, in addition to some net migration. On the upside, we project that the working-age population will grow more quickly than the overall population until 2040, providing a major demographic boom and keeping the dependency ratio low. The main challenge facing the country will be to create enough formal jobs for entrants to the labour market, so as to reduce informality. There has been some progress in expanding education to improve labour quality, but the lack of dynamism in the private sector means that there is a substantial risk of labour informality remaining high in the long term. Efforts will also be required to address the pension needs of an ageing population, which could increase strains on the country's already-vulnerable social security system.
External conditions: As a small, open economy, Ecuador has benefited from rising global trade, although it remains vulnerable to changes in commodity prices. This causes significant external and fiscal volatility, as demonstrated by frequent booms and busts depending on prices of oil (the country's biggest export). Inconsistent trade policies and the country's geographical distance from its biggest trade partners (particularly the US and the EU) will dampen possibilities for stronger integration with industrialised nations. There is scope for an increase in trade integration with neighbouring countries, but progress will be hindered by a lack of supply-chain strategies and infrastructure constraints. There has been some success in export diversification towards the Middle East, Russia and Asia, but Ecuador's small and distant market will act as a drag on its competitiveness profile, particularly compared with Asian emerging markets. As the economy is likely to remain heavily reliant on hydrocarbons and some mineral and agricultural products, the health of the external sector and GDP growth will hinge on the direction of terms of trade.
Future governments will struggle with a weak institutional framework Institutions and policy trends: Ecuador's institutions have long suffered from periods of instability. Inconsistent policymaking remains a major problem, both in conceiving and implementing new legislation. Successive administrations have changed policy directions. The Lasso government is struggling with policy implementation owing to its weak legislative position and a lack of support from a clear majority of the population, putting the president at increased risk of failing to see out his term; future governments will find these issues similarly difficult to overcome. Although power is concentrated in the executive, a highly fragmented political and social landscape will complicate governability. In the short term, this will be clear in the government's (sometimes frustrated) endeavours to adopt market-friendly reforms and restore health to the public finances after fiscal profligacy under Mr Correa. Regardless of their ideological inclination, future governments will continue to struggle with a weak legal framework, corruption and distorted policy priorities that either favour special interest groups or undermine the public finances.
Dollarisation will be protected by its broad-based popularity Dollarisation: The policy of dollarisation will be retained, as it is widely supported, on the basis that it delivers price and exchange-rate stability. Moreover, the costs of abandonment-in particular the fear of stoking social unrest-are high. Despite risks to the currency regime posed by fiscal adjustment challenges, we expect the government's commitment to an IMF-backed economic programme to strengthen the foundations of dollarisation; since 2019, under the auspices of the Fund, the government has approved legislation to bolster the country's medium-term fiscal framework and has strengthened the independence of the central bank. Continued IMF support augurs a more sustainable fiscal trajectory that is congruent with a fully dollarised economy. We believe that, although reform progress will be complicated by sizeable barriers to governability, the long-term sustainability of dollarisation will be reinforced, and that Ecuador's fiscal position will become more stable.
Long-term performance: Unattractive investment conditions and the lack of a competitive, skilled labour force will make Ecuador a relatively unappealing destination for foreign investment in labour-intensive or manufacturing activities. However, sustained improvements in education levels, added to productive investment in non-oil sectors and technology transfer, could make Ecuador more competitive and boost long-term growth. For this to occur, the country would need to strengthen its institutional framework and improve its business environment. Although the Lasso administration will pursue policies that strengthen private-led growth, our forecast suggests that progress on introducing structural reforms will be slow and insufficient for Ecuador to catch up (income-wise) with OECD countries in the long term.
Income and market size
  2021 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 17.7 19.4 22.2
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 0.1 0.1 0.3
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 5,990 7,590 13,980
Private consumption (US$ bn) 65.2 93.1 172.7
Private consumption per head (US$) 3,680 4,800 7,790
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 0.2 0.3 0.7
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 11,770 16,160 29,730
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 27.8 50.5 149.8
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 26.8 52.9 138.7
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 17.0 16.7 16.2
Share of world population (%) 0.2 0.2 0.2
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.1 0.1 0.1
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.0 0.0 0.0
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 0.1 0.1 0.1
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability Ecuador is prone to earthquakes and will therefore continue to suffer from natural disaster risk, but its adaptation and readiness will improve following a particularly devastating earthquake in 2016. Climate change preparedness, however, is lacking, which is a cause for concern, given that Ecuador's geographical location and diversity render it particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. Owing to the near constant temperature year-round, rising temperatures have threatened the development of glaciers, as they have not been able to replenish lost density during colder seasons. Indeed, Ecuador has experienced a significant reduction in the size of its glaciers in the two main mountain ranges-the Cordillera Oriental and the Cordillera Occidental-which in aggregate have been reduced by about a third over the past 50 years. By 2050 this trajectory will jeopardise the water sources for the country's major urban centres, including the capital, Quito. Rising temperatures will also affect agricultural production, as warmer winters will cause crops to sprout prematurely, and greater volatility in precipitation rates will disrupt production. Sustainability concerns will take centre stage in the medium to long term. Renewable energy currently accounts for about 90% of electricity generation, with hydroelectric power accounting for nearly all of this. Hydroelectric and geothermal power primarily, and wind and solar power secondarily, will play an important role in the medium to long term. However, the heavy use of hydroplants will raise the risk of climate-related infrastructure risks as erosion forces costly repairs. EIU expects the government to promote the transition towards renewable sources in the long term, which will also offer increasing business opportunities. However, in the short term, the government will still promote oil and mining production, which may pose long-term threats to environmental stability.
Migration and urbanisation Urbanisation in Ecuador is a relatively recent phenomenon and comparatively low for Latin America. The majority of the population has traditionally lived in rural communities in the mountainous sierra region. Since crossing the 50% threshold in 1990, the proportion of people living in cities has grown slowly, from about 62% in 2006 to 64% in 2020. The establishment of a middle class under a social spending and consumption-driven economic policy in the 2000s, particularly under a former president, Rafael Correa (2007-17), will sustain an increasing urban population. Meanwhile, security concerns in the north and environmental degradation in the sierra are likely to accelerate the pace of migration from rural areas to cities over the medium term. The country's infrastructure and natural resources will come under greater strain in that process, necessitating greater investment. There will be opportunities for public-private partnerships for infrastructure investment, but internal migration will also invite limited bouts of social unrest.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions
World GDP growth (%) 3.2 3.0 2.3 -3.7 5.7 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.6
US GDP growth (%) 2.3 2.9 2.3 -3.4 5.7 2.3 1.3 1.4 1.9 2.0
Latin America growth (%) 0.9 0.8 -0.7 -7.0 6.5 2.6 1.9 2.1 2.1 2.1
World trade growth (%) 5.6 3.8 0.2 -4.9 10.9 4.3 4.2 3.8 3.6 3.6
US CPI (%) 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.7 7.7 3.7 1.6 2.1 2.1
EU27 CPI (%) 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.8 7.2 3.3 2.1 2.0 1.9
Industrial raw materials export price (%) 20.2 2.2 -8.6 -3.2 40.4 16.5 -1.0 -2.9 -1.2 -2.7
Oil price (WTI; US$/b) 50.9 64.8 57.0 39.3 68.0 104.2 92.9 84.7 76.9 74.8
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (%) 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 1.5 3.2 2.8 2.7 2.7
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
¥:US$ (av) 112.1 110.4 109.0 106.8 109.8 126.3 131.7 129.6 121.6 117.8
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 104.3 107.6 108.1 99.3 106.2 110.7 116.4 120.4 123.7 127.0
Private consumption 62.5 64.2 64.5 58.8 65.2 69.0 72.4 75.0 77.3 79.7
Government consumption 15.2 15.8 15.6 16.2 16.2 16.9 17.4 17.9 18.1 18.3
Gross fixed investment 26.5 27.5 26.9 21.1 22.5 24.4 26.4 28.0 29.4 30.6
Exports of goods & services 21.7 24.3 24.9 21.7 27.8 33.5 35.1 36.9 38.7 40.4
Imports of goods & services 22.5 25.6 24.9 19.4 26.8 33.8 35.7 38.2 40.7 42.9
Stockbuilding 0.9 1.3 1.1 0.8 1.2 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.9
Domestic demand 105.1 108.8 108.1 97.0 105.1 111.0 117.0 121.7 125.7 129.5
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 59.9 59.7 59.7 59.3 61.4 62.4 62.2 62.3 62.4 62.7
Government consumption 14.6 14.7 14.4 16.4 15.3 15.3 14.9 14.9 14.7 14.4
Gross fixed investment 25.4 25.6 24.9 21.2 21.2 22.0 22.7 23.3 23.7 24.1
Stockbuilding 0.9 1.2 1.0 0.8 1.2 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Exports of goods & services 20.8 22.6 23.0 21.9 26.2 30.2 30.2 30.6 31.3 31.8
Imports of goods & services 21.6 23.8 23.0 19.5 25.2 30.6 30.7 31.7 32.9 33.8
Memorandum item
Gross national savings ratio (%) 26.1 25.5 25.8 24.8 25.1 26.3 26.4 26.4 27.0 26.5
Crude oil production ('000 b/d) 531.3 517.2 531.0 480.7 473.3 c 520.0 555.0 545.0 550.0 551.0
Oil exports (US$ m) 6,919.8 8,801.8 8,679.6 5,250.4 8,752.4 c 15,005.6 14,265.0 13,329.7 12,397.6 12,081.6
Non-oil exports (US$ m) 12,172.5 12,826.2 13,649.8 15,105.0 17,946.8 c 18,734.1 21,400.8 24,015.3 27,412.7 28,862.6
Oil imports (US$ m) 3,181.9 4,340.6 4,148.8 2,647.1 4,649.5 c 5,475.0 5,878.4 6,357.6 6,674.7 6,961.1
Non-oil imports (US$ m) 16,827.1 18,836.9 18,415.5 15,270.9 21,037.7 c 27,002.5 28,448.4 30,331.3 32,369.6 34,277.7
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Real expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at constant 2007 prices)
GDP 71.0 71.9 71.9 66.3 69.1 70.8 72.3 73.7 74.6 76.0
Private consumption 43.6 44.5 44.6 41.0 45.1 46.0 46.9 47.5 47.9 49.0
Government consumption 10.8 11.2 10.9 10.4 10.2 10.2 10.2 10.2 10.1 10.0
Gross fixed investment 16.8 17.1 16.5 13.4 14.0 14.5 15.3 15.9 16.3 16.7
Exports of goods & services 19.6 19.9 20.6 19.5 19.4 20.7 21.7 22.6 23.6 24.6
Imports of goods & services 20.2 21.1 21.2 18.2 20.6 21.5 22.2 23.1 24.0 24.9
Stockbuilding 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.0 0.8 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.5
Domestic demand 71.5 73.1 72.4 65.0 70.3 71.6 72.8 74.1 75.0 76.2
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 2.4 1.3 0.0 -7.8 4.2 2.5 2.1 1.9 1.3 1.9
Private consumption 3.7 2.1 0.3 -8.2 10.2 2.0 1.8 1.3 1.0 2.2
Government consumption 3.2 3.5 -2.0 -5.1 -1.7 0.3 -0.8 0.7 -1.2 -1.2
Gross fixed investment 5.3 2.0 -3.3 -19.0 4.3 4.2 5.1 3.8 2.8 2.6
Exports of goods & services 0.7 1.2 3.6 -5.4 -0.1 6.2 5.1 4.3 4.3 4.4
Imports of goods & services 12.2 4.4 0.3 -13.8 13.2 4.0 3.6 4.0 3.8 3.6
Domestic demand 5.5 2.2 -0.9 -10.2 8.1 1.9 1.7 1.8 1.2 1.6
Real contribution to growth (%)
Private consumption 2.3 1.3 0.2 -5.1 6.3 1.3 1.2 0.8 0.6 1.4
Government consumption 0.5 0.5 -0.3 -0.8 -0.3 0.0 -0.1 0.1 -0.2 -0.2
Gross fixed investment 1.2 0.5 -0.8 -4.4 0.9 0.8 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.6
External balance -3.0 -0.9 0.9 2.5 -3.7 0.6 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.2
Memorandum item
Oil production ('000 b/d) 531 517 531 481 473 c 520 555 545 550 551
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Origin of GDP (US$ bn at constant 2007 prices)
GDP at factor cost 68.7 69.5 69.7 64.5 67.0 68.7 70.1 71.4 72.3 73.7
Agriculture 6.8 6.8 6.9 6.9 7.2 7.2 7.3 7.5 7.6 7.8
Industry 23.8 23.5 23.6 21.2 21.3 21.9 22.2 22.5 22.7 22.9
Services 38.1 39.2 39.2 36.4 38.5 39.6 40.5 41.4 42.0 42.9
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 5.5 0.1 1.6 0.4 3.4 0.2 1.8 2.1 2.2 2.3
Industry 0.0 -1.0 0.2 -10.0 0.5 2.8 1.6 1.0 1.0 1.0
Services 2.0 2.7 0.1 -7.2 5.8 2.8 2.4 2.3 1.3 2.3
Origin of GDP (% of GDP at current factor cost)
Agriculture 9.9 9.8 9.9 10.8 10.7 10.5 10.4 10.5 10.6 10.6
Industry 34.6 33.8 33.8 32.9 31.8 31.9 31.7 31.5 31.4 31.1
Services 55.5 56.4 56.3 56.4 57.5 57.6 57.8 58.1 58.1 58.3
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity
Labour productivity growth (% -0.9 1.0 -0.7 -6.6 -2.8 0.5 0.1 0.5 -0.2 0.4
Total factor productivity growth (%) 0.8 1.8 0.4 -7.3 -0.8 -0.2 0.3 0.4 -0.3 0.2
Growth of capital stock (%) 4.1 3.9 3.2 1.1 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.8
Growth of potential GDP (%) 4.0 2.7 2.1 -7.1 3.7 1.3 2.0 2.1 1.4 2.0
Growth of GDP (%) 2.4 c 1.3 c 0.0 c -7.8 c 4.2 c 2.5 2.1 1.9 1.3 1.9
Growth of GDP per head (%) 0.9 c -0.2 c -1.4 c -9.1 c 3.0 c 1.4 1.0 0.8 0.3 0.9
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 16.8 17.0 17.3 17.5 17.7 17.9 18.1 18.3 18.5 18.7
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 104.3 107.6 108.1 99.3 106.2 110.7 116.4 120.4 123.7 127.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 6,217 6,319 6,261 5,670 5,992 6,176 6,425 6,580 6,695 6,801
Private consumption (US$ bn) 62.5 64.2 64.5 58.8 65.2 69.0 72.4 75.0 77.3 79.7
Private consumption per head (US$) 3,720 3,770 3,740 3,360 3,680 3,850 4,000 4,100 4,180 4,270
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 195.0 202.3 205.9 192.1 208.6 226.7 239.8 248.6 257.2 267.5
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 11,624 11,882 11,923 10,972 11,774 12,652 13,239 13,590 13,917 14,330
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 65.3 c 64.2 c 64.5 c 58.8 c 65.2 c 69.5 73.5 76.5 79.1 81.8
Growth of real disposable income (%) 3.7 c -2.3 c 0.3 c -8.2 c 10.2 c 2.6 2.7 1.8 1.3 2.5
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.22 0.23 0.23 0.23 0.23 0.23 0.23 0.23 0.24 0.23
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.13 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.10 0.10
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.16 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.11 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.15
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Public-sector revenue 34.8 38.1 36.1 31.7 36.1 34.7 34.4 34.9 34.9 35.2
Public-sector expenditure 39.8 41.0 39.6 38.9 37.6 34.7 33.6 33.6 33.7 34.1
Interest 2.1 2.5 2.8 2.9 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.4
Non-interest expenditure 37.6 38.4 36.9 36.0 36.3 33.2 32.0 31.7 31.5 31.7
Budget balance -5.0 -2.8 -3.5 -7.1 -1.5 0.0 0.8 1.3 1.2 1.1
Primary balance -2.9 -0.3 -0.7 -4.3 -0.2 1.6 2.4 3.2 3.3 3.5
Government debt 44.6 46.0 53.0 63.6 58.6 56.1 52.6 50.4 48.6 47.1
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
Exchange rate US$:€ (end-period) 1.20 1.15 1.12 1.23 1.13 1.12 1.18 1.22 1.24 1.25
Real effective exchange rate (av; 2010=100) 120.1 116.4 118.3 118.3 112.4 113.4 112.5 110.8 109.4 108.4
Real effective exchange rate (av) PPI-based 119.6 115.9 118.3 119.8 107.0 104.5 103.9 103.4 103.2 101.9
Real effective exchange rate (av) ULC-based 151.3 149.4 154.3 164.0 162.3 164.7 165.1 164.1 164.2 164.2
Purchasing power parity LCU:US$ (av) 0.53 c 0.53 c 0.53 c 0.52 c 0.51 c 0.49 0.49 0.48 0.48 0.47
Deposit rate (av; %) 4.9 c 5.1 c 5.9 c 6.3 c 5.6 c 5.6 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.0
Deposit banks' prime lending rate (av; %) 7.9 c 7.7 c 8.6 c 8.9 c 8.1 c 7.3 7.5 7.6 7.8 8.0
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 8.1 8.0 8.1 8.1 8.6 c 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.2 9.4
Labour force (% change) 2.7 -0.7 0.9 -0.2 6.4 c 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.7 1.7
Unemployment rate (%) 4.4 4.1 4.4 8.1 4.8 4.3 4.2 4.5 4.7 4.9
Wage and price inflation
Consumer prices (%; av) 0.4 -0.2 0.3 -0.3 0.1 3.9 3.0 2.2 2.1 1.6
Consumer prices (%; end-period) -0.2 0.3 0.0 -0.9 2.0 4.9 1.4 3.0 0.9 2.6
Producer prices (%; av) -0.7 1.3 -0.1 -1.0 0.9 7.2 3.3 3.2 3.3 1.6
GDP deflator (%; av) 1.9 1.8 0.5 -0.4 2.6 1.7 3.0 1.6 1.4 0.7
Private consumption deflator (%; av) 0.6 0.7 0.2 -0.6 0.5 3.9 3.0 2.2 2.1 0.8
Government consumption deflator (%; av) 0.9 0.6 0.4 9.8 1.6 4.2 3.3 2.5 2.4 1.9
Fixed investment deflator (%; av) 0.3 1.8 1.1 -3.3 2.4 3.9 3.0 2.2 2.1 1.6
Average real wages (%; av) 2.1 3.2 1.8 1.9 -0.1 0.6 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.5
Unit labour costs (US$-based) 3.4 1.9 2.8 8.7 2.9 3.9 4.0 2.9 3.5 2.8
Labour costs per hour (US$) 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -0.5 -1.5 -0.1 2.7 3.0 4.0 3.6 2.9 3.1 2.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -0.5 -1.4 -0.1 2.7 2.8 3.6 3.1 2.4 2.5 1.7
Goods: exports fob 19.6 22.1 22.8 20.6 27.2 34.4 36.4 38.1 40.6 41.8
Goods: imports fob -19.3 -22.4 -21.7 -17.1 -24.0 -30.3 -32.0 -34.2 -36.4 -38.5
Trade balance 0.3 -0.2 1.0 3.5 3.3 4.1 4.3 3.9 4.2 3.3
Services: credit 2.2 2.5 3.3 1.8 2.1 2.5 2.7 3.0 3.3 3.7
Services: debit -3.3 -3.3 -4.1 -2.8 -4.6 -4.9 -5.3 -5.7 -6.1 -6.4
Services balance -1.1 -0.7 -0.8 -1.0 -2.5 -2.4 -2.6 -2.7 -2.8 -2.8
Primary income: credit 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4
Primary income: debit -2.6 -3.2 -3.2 -2.9 -1.7 -2.4 -3.3 -3.3 -3.4 -3.6
Primary income balance -2.4 -2.9 -3.0 -2.8 -1.7 -2.2 -2.9 -2.9 -3.1 -3.2
Secondary income: credit 3.4 3.5 3.7 3.8 4.8 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 6.0
Secondary income: debit -0.7 -1.1 -0.9 -0.8 -1.0 -1.0 -1.1 -1.1 -1.1 -1.2
Secondary income balance 2.7 2.4 2.7 3.0 3.9 4.6 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 86.6 96.5 92.0 72.9 90.2 c 109.7 106.8 105.9 105.3 103.8
Export prices (% change) 8.3 11.4 -4.7 -20.8 23.9 c 21.5 -2.6 -0.8 -0.6 -1.4
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 87.7 97.9 96.0 81.9 95.4 c 116.0 118.3 121.6 124.7 127.1
Import prices (% change) 10.4 11.6 -2.0 -14.6 16.5 c 21.6 2.0 2.8 2.5 2.0
Terms of trade (2010=100) 98.8 98.5 95.8 88.9 94.6 c 94.6 90.2 87.1 84.5 81.7
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 5.8 c 3.5 c 0.6 c -7.9 c 15.2 c 4.2 2.3 3.1 2.4 3.1
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment 0.6 1.4 1.0 1.1 0.6 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 1.0
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 0.6 1.3 0.9 1.1 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 2.4 5.0 3.6 5.2 2.8 3.1 3.5 3.2 3.2 3.2
Outward direct investment 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Net foreign direct investment 0.6 1.4 1.0 1.1 0.6 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 1.0
Stock of foreign direct investment 17.3 18.7 19.7 20.8 21.4 22.2 23.1 24.0 24.9 25.9
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 1,031.2 1,097.9 1,138.7 1,186.0 1,208.0 1,237.1 1,275.0 1,311.8 1,349.3 1,387.6
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 16.6 17.4 18.2 20.9 20.2 20.0 19.8 19.9 20.2 20.4
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.03 0.35 0.09 0.11 0.06 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 41.2 44.9 51.9 56.2 58.5 60.1 60.8 63.3 66.0 68.6
Total external debt (% of GDP) 39.5 41.8 48.0 56.6 55.1 54.3 52.3 52.6 53.3 54.0
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 26.7 32.7 31.8 36.0 20.7 19.3 21.4 21.4 20.9 21.2
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU
Global data Commodity prices: IMF, IFS; non-oil
OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: Brent average import prices
US and European GDP growth: OECD
US effective exchange-rate index: IMF, IFS; nominal weighted index, 1990=100
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
Domestic data Balance of payments: IMF, IFS
Debt-service ratio: ratio of total debt service paid to exports of goods and services
Deposit rate: average rate weighted by deposit amount on 30- to 59-day time deposits
General government debt: includes debt of the non-financial and financial public sectors
Inflation: IMF, IFS; derived from consumer price index (CPI), 2006=100Trade by country: IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics Yearbook
Lending rate: average rate charged by commercial banks on non-preferential loans. The rate is weighted by loan amounts
Long-term external debt: World Bank, International Debt Statistics; year-end medium- and long-term publicly guaranteed and non-guaranteed debt outstanding with an original maturity in excess of one year, plus arrears and year-end IMF debt outstanding
Population and growth: Celade
PPP: purchasing power parity; average ratio of prices in Costa Rica to prices in the US
Real exchange rate: EIU; a real exchange rate of less than 100% indicates that the currency is undervalued vis-à-vis relative prices and vice versa
Total debt service: World Bank, International Debt Statistics; principal repayments made against long-term debt, plus interest payments and IMF charges paid against total external debt
Total external debt: sum of long-term debt, short-term debt and arrears
US$ GDP at PPP: IMF, IFS; EIU; local-currency GDP converted to US dollars at estimated annual average of consumer products' PPP
US$ GDP: IMF, IFS; local-currency GDP converted to US dollars at annual average market exchange rate
Abbreviations Celade: Centro Latinoamericano y Caribeño de Demografía
IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows the EIU to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by the EIU for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2017-21) and from EIU assessments for the forecast period (2022-26). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by the EIU for 2017-21. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2022-26 are based on EIU assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; the EIU, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2017-21 ranges are then used to derive 2022-26 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2022-26, not to the likely situation in 2026 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2019 or 2024). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2017-21   2022-26  
  Ecuador Regional average a Ecuador Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 4 4.3 4 4.3
  2. Risk of social unrest 2 2.8 2 2.1
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 3 3.3 4 3.4
  4. Government and opposition 3 3.3 3 2.8
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 4 3.6 4 3.7
  6. International disputes or tensions 3 3.3 3 3.2
  7. Government policy towards business 2 3.1 4 3.1
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 2 2.5 2 2.3
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 2 2.5 2 2.8
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 2 2.5 2 2.6
 11. Efficiency of legal system 2 2.3 2 2.3
 12. Corruption 1 2.2 2 2.3
 13. Impact of crime 3 2.7 2 2.3
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 5 3.8 5 3.7
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 3 2.5 5 3.2
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 4 3.3 4 3.1
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 5 3.3 4 3.3
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 5 4.0 5 3.9
  6. Quality of policymaking 3 3.1 3 3.0
  7. Institutional underpinnings 3 3.3 4 3.3
  8. Asset prices 3 2.8 3 2.7
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 3 3.4 3 3.4
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 3 2.9 3 3.2
  3. Real GDP growth* 1 1.8 3 3.0
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 1 1.9 1 1.9
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 1 1.3 2 2.1
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 2 1.7 3 2.4
  7. The natural resource endowment* 3 3.2 3 3.2
  8. Profitability* 1 2.1 3 3.4
  9. Regional integration 3 3.0 3 3.1
 10. Proximity to markets 2 2.4 2 2.1
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 3 3.1 3 2.9
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 3 2.8 3 2.8
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 3 3.2 4 3.1
  4. Promotion of competition 1 2.6 3 2.8
  5. Protection of intellectual property 2 2.5 3 2.7
  6. Price controls 3 3.5 4 3.5
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 2 2.3 2 2.2
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 2 2.9 3 2.9
  9. Minority shareholders 2 2.5 2 2.8
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 3 3.4 4 3.3
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 3 3.8 4 3.8
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 2 3.4 3 3.2
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 2 3.1 3 3.3
  5. Government favouritism 2 3.0 3 2.9
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 4 3.8 4 3.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 3 3.7 4 3.7
  3. Ease of trading* 3 3.2 3 3.1
  4. Openness of trade* 2 3.2 3 4.1
  5. Restrictions on the current account 5 4.3 5 4.3
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 4 3.7 4 3.4
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 5 4.5 4 4.2
  3. Value-added tax* 4 3.0 4 3.0
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 3 3.3 4 3.3
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 2 2.7 3 2.7
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 2 2.6 3 2.8
  7. Tax complexity 2 2.3 2 2.3
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 2 2.9 3 3.1
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 2 2.5 3 2.8
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 3 3.3 3 3.4
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 2 2.9 2 2.9
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 2 3.1 3 3.3
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 2 2.6 3 2.8
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 4 4.2 4 4.1
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 2 3.2 3 3.3
  3. Quality of workforce* 2 3.0 2 2.8
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 3 3.0 3 3.1
  5. Health of the workforce* 4 4.0 4 4.0
  6. Level of technical skills 2 3.0 2 3.0
  7. Cost of living* 4 3.8 5 3.8
  8. Incidence of strikes* 2 3.0 2 3.0
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 2 2.4 3 2.5
 10. Extent of wage regulation 3 3.2 3 3.2
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 4 3.5 4 3.6
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 2 3.2 3 3.2
  2. Broadband connection speed* 1 1.3 3 2.8
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 2 2.3 2 2.4
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 3 2.9 3 3.3
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 2 2.3 2 2.4
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 2 2.9 3 3.0
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 3 3.1 3 3.2
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 2 2.0 2 2.3
  9. Rents of office space* 5 3.7 5 3.8
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 1 2.3 1 2.3
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 2 3.0 3 3.3
  3. Scope of e-government* 3 2.8 3 3.3
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 3 3.5 2 3.1
  5. Internet use* 2 2.8 3 3.6
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 1 2.2 1 2.8
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 2 2.2 2 2.3
  8. Research infrastructure* 2 2.8 2 2.8
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

Subject: Macroeconomics; Foreign exchange rates; Labor force; Politics; Pandemics; Productivity; Consumption; Mineral reserves; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Presidents; Population growth; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Reforms; Tax reform; Purchasing power

Business indexing term: Subject: Macroeconomics Foreign exchange rates Labor force Productivity Consumption International trad e Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Tax reform Purchasing power; Industry: 92111 :‎ Executive Offices

Location: Ecuador; Latin America

People: Lasso, Guillermo; Correa, Rafael

Company / organization: Name: Congress; NAICS: 921120

Classification: 92111: Executive Offices

Identifier / keyword: Ecuador; Latin America

Title: Country Forecast Ecuador July 2022

Publication title: Country Forecast. Ecuador; New York

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jul 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09669515

e-ISSN: 20489293

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Statistics, Country Report

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2714195120

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-ecuador-july-2022/docview/2714195120/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Europe June 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-europe-june-2022/docview/2714785985/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: EU27 2021 Euro area 2021 Population (m) 444.1 Population (m) 339.3 Population growth (%) 0.0 Population growth (%) 0.0 GDP (US$ bn; at market exchange rates) 17,094 GDP (US$ bn; at market exchange rates) 14,475 GDP growth (%) 5.4 GDP growth (%) 5.4 GDP per head (US$; at market exchange rates) 38,491 GDP per head (US$; at market exchange rates) 42,658 Inflation (av; %) 2.8 Inflation (av; %) 2.5 Background: The political geography of Europe has been defined by two world wars. Nineteen EU members share the euro as their currency and are subject to a single monetary policy administered by the European Central Bank. Surging inflation is forcing the European Central Bank (ECB) to tighten monetary policy, and we expect it to act decisively in front-loading rate increases. EU27 Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth 5.4 3.3 2.5 2.0 2.0 1.9 GDP (US$ bn) 17,094 17,436 18,628 20,214 21,705 22,841 GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 49,392 53,201 56,213 58,856 61,460 64,162 Consumer price inflation (av; %) 2.8 7.1 3.3 2.0 2.0 1.9 US$:€ (av) 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 Basic data, EU27 plus UK, 2021a Population (m) GDP (US$ bn) GDP per head (US$) GDP growth (%) Inflation (%) GDP per headb GDP (PPP; US$ bn) GDP per head (PPP) GDP per head (PPP)b Turkey 85.0 808.3 9,505 11.0 19.6 21.2 2,744.9 32,277 61.5 Germany 82.9 4,215.7 50,862 2.9 3.2 113.4 4,869.4 58,749 111.9 UK 68.2 3,188.4 46,746 7.4 2.5 104.3 3,406.0 49,935 95.1 France 65.4 2,957.4 45,202 6.8 2.1 100.8 3,501.7 53,521 101.9 Italy 60.4 2,099.3 34,775 6.6 1.9 77.6 2,752.6 45,597 86.8 Spain 46.7 1,426.2 30,511 5.1 3.0 68.0 1,960.4 41,938 79.9 Poland 37.8 679.1 17,966 5.9 5.1 40.1 1,451.2 38,395 73.1 Romania 19.1 284.1 14,852 6.0 5.0 33.1 684.4 35,780 68.1 Netherlands 17.4 1,018.4 58,530 5.0 2.8 130.5 1,135.4 65,252 124.3 Belgium 11.6 600.3 51,605 6.2 3.2 115.1 694.8 59,729 113.7 Czech Republic 10.7 282.2 26,317 3.3 3.8 58.7 480.3 44,787 85.3 Greece 10.4 215.8 20,806 8.0 0.6 46.4 338.6 32,646 62.2 Portugal 10.3 250.1 24,281 4.9 0.9 54.2 374.4 36,356 69.2 Sweden 10.2 626.1 61,452 4.6 2.4 137.1 627.7 61,613 117.3 Hungary 9.6 181.8 18,865 7.1 5.1 42.1 361.2 37,488 71.4 Austria 8.7 477.0 54,899 4.6 2.8 122.4 531.4 61,163 116.5 Switzerland 8.7 812.5 93,064 3.7 0.6 207.6 675.9 77,413 147.4 Bulgaria 6.9 80.3 11,646 3.8 3.3 26.0 184.2 26,731 50.9 Denmark 5.8 397.0 68,299 4.7 1.9 152.3 384.4 66,128 125.9 Finland 5.5 299.4 53,954 3.5 2.1 120.3 309.0 55,696 106.1 Slovakia 5.5 114.9 21,050 3.0 2.8 46.9 182.1 33,350 63.5 Norway 5.4 480.7 88,770 4.0 3.5 198.0 369.0 68,147 129.8 Ireland 5.0 497.8 99,908 13.4 2.4 222.8 542.4 108,853 207.3 Croatia 4.1 67.8 16,620 10.4 2.6 37.1 129.2 31,663 60.3 Lithuania 2.7 65.5 24,368 5.0 4.6 54.3 119.0 44,255 84.3 Slovenia 2.1 61.2 29,462 8.1 2.0 65.7 92.6 44,524 84.8 Latvia 1.9 38.8 20,633 4.4 3.3 46.0 46.5 24,739 47.1 Estonia 1.3 36.0 27,099 8.2 4.7 60.4 56.4 42,495 80.9 Cyprus 0.9 27.6 30,846 5.5 2.3 68.8 39.5 44,080 83.9 Malta 0.5 17.2 32,672 9.3 0.7 72.9 25.4 48,299 92.0 a Ranked by size of national population. b Percentage of EU average.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+European+Union&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Europe+June+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-21&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+European+Union&amp;rft.issn=17468760&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: EU27 2021 Euro area 2021
Population (m) 444.1 Population (m) 339.3
Population growth (%) 0.0 Population growth (%) 0.0
GDP (US$ bn; at market exchange rates) 17,094 GDP (US$ bn; at market exchange rates) 14,475
GDP growth (%) 5.4 GDP growth (%) 5.4
GDP per head (US$; at market exchange rates) 38,491 GDP per head (US$; at market exchange rates) 42,658
Inflation (av; %) 2.8 Inflation (av; %) 2.5
Background: The political geography of Europe has been defined by two world wars. The EU's creation dates back to the Rome Treaty of 1957, which created the European Economic Community between the six founding EU member states (France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg). After four enlargements in 1973 (UK, Denmark, Ireland), 1981 (Greece), 1986 (Spain and Portugal) and 1995 (Austria, Finland and Sweden), the EU counted 15 members. The collapse in 1991 of the Soviet Union provided an opportunity to expand the EU eastwards. Ten new member states (eight from the former communist bloc) were admitted to the EU in 2004, followed by a further two in 2007, and Croatia in 2013. In June 2016 the UK electorate voted in a referendum to withdraw from the EU. The UK formally left the bloc in January 2020 and a transition period ended on December 31st 2020. The economic transition of the Visegrad countries (the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia) has proceeded more smoothly than those of other east European countries. The effects of war in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s and a slower pace of reform have shaped changes in south-eastern Europe. In the Commonwealth of Independent States, many countries retain deep economic and political ties with Russia.
Political structure: All 27 EU member states are parliamentary democracies, although in some of the newer, former communist members in particular, the substance of democracy-including a political culture based on trust and political participation-is often absent. The communist period lasted much longer in the former Soviet Union, and political developments in most parts of that region have been characterised by a drift towards authoritarianism.
Policy issues: Fiscal and monetary policy levers are currently being used to the full across Europe to counter the damaging economic impact of Russia's war in Ukraine and the coronavirus pandemic. Many aspects of domestic policy for EU member states-notably those relating to the single market-are decided collectively at EU level. Nineteen EU members share the euro as their currency and are subject to a single monetary policy administered by the European Central Bank. They are supposed to comply with common fiscal rules, although these have sometimes been ignored and, owing to the pandemic, are currently suspended to allow economic stimulus measures to be taken. Outside the EU, the speed and extent of reform and institutional change vary widely. Countries with proximity to Western markets and with stable political outlooks have proceeded faster-and more successfully-with economic stabilisation, liberalisation and privatisation. Institutional problems, such as weakness in the rule of law and widespread corruption, plague much of non-EU Europe.
Taxation: Individual tax regimes operate in all countries. All EU member states must operate a system of value-added tax (VAT), with a minimum of 15% as the standard rate.
Foreign trade: If intra-EU trade is included, the EU accounts for about half of all global trade. About 60% of trade conducted by EU member states is intra-regional.
EU27, leading non-EU export markets 2021 % of total EU27, leading non-EU sources of imports 2021 % of total
US 18.3 China 22.3
UK 13.0 US 11.0
China 10.3 Russia 7.7
Switzerland 7.2 UK 6.9
Russia 4.1 Switzerland 5.8
Summary Political stability
- The consequences of Russia's invasion of Ukraine will be profound, creating a new division of the continent and bringing about far-reaching changes in Europe's foreign and security policies. Germany has made a particularly dramatic policy U-turn and is set to spend EUR100bn on defence spending.
- Rather than reducing NATO's footprint in Europe, Russia's actions have given NATO a new lease of life. The entry of Finland and Sweden into NATO signifies a major ideological shift, and has practical security implications. Their accession will significantly expand NATO's capabilities on Russia's doorstep.
- The question of EU enlargement has returned to the top of the political agenda with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskyi, calling for Ukraine's accession. The European Commission has issued a recommendation that the country be given candidate status; accession is a distant prospect, however.

Economic policy
- Addressing the current energy price spike is an important policy priority. As utility costs have soared, concerns about purchasing power have climbed the political agenda, and governments have moved quickly to tackle the crisis.
- EU sanctions on Russia have been extended to cover oil, and a major energy transition is now under way to reduce reliance on Russian gas, as the security of Europe's energy supply increasingly appears under threat.
- Surging inflation is forcing the European Central Bank (ECB) to tighten monetary policy, and we expect it to act decisively in front-loading rate increases. We expect it to raise the deposit rate four times in 2022, by 25 basis points in July, 50 points in September and October, and 25 points in December.

Economic growth
- The European economy is facing several headwinds. Surging inflation is weighing on consumers' purchasing power and damaging business sentiment. External demand is slowing as the US begins its monetary tightening cycle and China continues its zero-covid policy, while spillover effects from the war in Ukraine mean higher commodity prices and disrupted supply chains.
- Economic activity will be weak this year, but annual growth rates will remain strong: the bounce-back in 2021 as the economy recovered from the pandemic-induced recession means that carry-over effects are substantial.

Business environment rankings
- A focus on "mission-oriented" industrial policy in the EU presents opportunities, especially for progress on green and digital agendas. The EUR750bn recovery fund will support growth-enhancing investment across the region.

EU27
Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth 5.4 3.3 2.5 2.0 2.0 1.9
GDP (US$ bn) 17,094 17,436 18,628 20,214 21,705 22,841
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 49,392 53,201 56,213 58,856 61,460 64,162
Consumer price inflation (av; %) 2.8 7.1 3.3 2.0 2.0 1.9
US$:€ (av) 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23
Basic data, EU27 plus UK, 2021 a
  Population (m) GDP (US$ bn) GDP per head (US$) GDP growth (%) Inflation (%) GDP per head b GDP (PPP; US$ bn) GDP per head (PPP) GDP per head (PPP) b
Turkey 85.0 808.3 9,505 11.0 19.6 21.2 2,744.9 32,277 61.5
Germany 82.9 4,215.7 50,862 2.9 3.2 113.4 4,869.4 58,749 111.9
UK 68.2 3,188.4 46,746 7.4 2.5 104.3 3,406.0 49,935 95.1
France 65.4 2,957.4 45,202 6.8 2.1 100.8 3,501.7 53,521 101.9
Italy 60.4 2,099.3 34,775 6.6 1.9 77.6 2,752.6 45,597 86.8
Spain 46.7 1,426.2 30,511 5.1 3.0 68.0 1,960.4 41,938 79.9
Poland 37.8 679.1 17,966 5.9 5.1 40.1 1,451.2 38,395 73.1
Romania 19.1 284.1 14,852 6.0 5.0 33.1 684.4 35,780 68.1
Netherlands 17.4 1,018.4 58,530 5.0 2.8 130.5 1,135.4 65,252 124.3
Belgium 11.6 600.3 51,605 6.2 3.2 115.1 694.8 59,729 113.7
Czech Republic 10.7 282.2 26,317 3.3 3.8 58.7 480.3 44,787 85.3
Greece 10.4 215.8 20,806 8.0 0.6 46.4 338.6 32,646 62.2
Portugal 10.3 250.1 24,281 4.9 0.9 54.2 374.4 36,356 69.2
Sweden 10.2 626.1 61,452 4.6 2.4 137.1 627.7 61,613 117.3
Hungary 9.6 181.8 18,865 7.1 5.1 42.1 361.2 37,488 71.4
Austria 8.7 477.0 54,899 4.6 2.8 122.4 531.4 61,163 116.5
Switzerland 8.7 812.5 93,064 3.7 0.6 207.6 675.9 77,413 147.4
Bulgaria 6.9 80.3 11,646 3.8 3.3 26.0 184.2 26,731 50.9
Denmark 5.8 397.0 68,299 4.7 1.9 152.3 384.4 66,128 125.9
Finland 5.5 299.4 53,954 3.5 2.1 120.3 309.0 55,696 106.1
Slovakia 5.5 114.9 21,050 3.0 2.8 46.9 182.1 33,350 63.5
Norway 5.4 480.7 88,770 4.0 3.5 198.0 369.0 68,147 129.8
Ireland 5.0 497.8 99,908 13.4 2.4 222.8 542.4 108,853 207.3
Croatia 4.1 67.8 16,620 10.4 2.6 37.1 129.2 31,663 60.3
Lithuania 2.7 65.5 24,368 5.0 4.6 54.3 119.0 44,255 84.3
Slovenia 2.1 61.2 29,462 8.1 2.0 65.7 92.6 44,524 84.8
Latvia 1.9 38.8 20,633 4.4 3.3 46.0 46.5 24,739 47.1
Estonia 1.3 36.0 27,099 8.2 4.7 60.4 56.4 42,495 80.9
Cyprus 0.9 27.6 30,846 5.5 2.3 68.8 39.5 44,080 83.9
Malta 0.5 17.2 32,672 9.3 0.7 72.9 25.4 48,299 92.0
a Ranked by size of national population. b Percentage of EU average.
Euro area: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain.
Old EU14: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden.
New EU13: Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia.
EU27: EU14 plus EU13
Political outlook: Political stability Russia's invasion of Ukraine represents a repudiation of the Western-led "rules based order", and signals a turning away from Europe and the creation of a new division of the continent, three decades after the fall of the Berlin Wall. This will have profound repercussions for Europe and the world.
Russia's decision to invade rested on a number of miscalculations, not least an underestimation of Ukraine's willingness to fight and the country's military, which the West had been equipping and training for years. Having sustained heavy losses of troops and equipment in its failed assault on the capital, Kiev, Russia appears to have scaled back its objectives to consolidating its position in the eastern Donbas region and establishing a land corridor connecting Russia to Crimea. However, it may not have abandoned its original goals of subjugating the country and toppling the government, and may revive these at a later date.
The war in Ukraine is likely to be long, as the issues at stake are existential We expect the war to continue at a high level of intensity throughout 2022, and at a greater or lesser tempo for years to come. The war is still at a relatively early stage, and we envisage several possible outcomes, including Russia's annexation of more territory, a further rout of Russian forces and a negotiated settlement. However, we expect several factors to prolong the war. The first is that the issues at stake for Ukraine and Russia are existential and are not susceptible to compromise. Ukraine is fighting for its right to self-determination. Its government and people have shown that they are prepared to make great sacrifices to defend their national sovereignty.
Meanwhile, Russia has presented its invasion as a "special military operation" to protect Russians in Ukraine against a Nazi-type regime. Backing off from completing what it presents as an existential mission is almost impossible. Putting aside its outlandish claims, Russia's real aim appears to be to put a stop to Ukraine's integration into Western institutions such as NATO, which it regards as a security threat. For Vladimir Putin's regime, winning the war in Ukraine, or being seen to win, has become vital to its future survival.
The longer the war drags on, the greater the risk of the conflict spilling over The war in Ukraine is not a proxy war, but has some characteristics of one, with the West standing firmly behind Ukraine in its fight against Russia. Western leaders have said that they will not become directly involved in the war, but their provision of military aid and intelligence to Ukraine carries the risk of their being drawn inadvertently into the conflict. The longer the war drags on, the greater the risk of the West being pulled in, either as a result of a military miscalculation by either side or of the war accidentally spilling over into a NATO member state. Such an unplanned event would pose the risk of a much more serious global conflict.
Even if such a scenario is avoided, the war marks a geopolitical watershed. It will result in Russia's exclusion from the Western economic and political order. Sanctions will remain in place indefinitely, and Russia will become a no-go area for Western businesses. The Kremlin will come to rely increasingly on China and the developing world. The West will have to reorganise its global supply chains, including for commodities supplied by Russia. Ukraine and the wider region will remain a zone of instability for many years to come.
Defence spending will be substantially increased in Europe in response After Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014, and following several years of falling defence spending, NATO members committed to spending 2% of GDP on defence as part of broader efforts to strengthen European security. Since then, NATO defence spending has risen in real terms by an annual average of 3.7%. But despite this, defence spending has remained below the 2% of GDP mark in most countries in Europe. Russia's invasion of Ukraine has changed this. Seven European countries-Germany, Italy, Belgium, Denmark, Romania, Poland and Norway-have announced plans to increase defence spending towards, or in some cases above, the 2% target. Others are likely to follow. This will raise the controversial question of whether Ukraine-related military spending should be exempted from European fiscal deficit rules.
The most significant policy shift is in Germany, which has broken with decades of reluctance and changed its constitution to enable the investment of EUR100bn in the German armed forces and ensure that spending averages at least 2% of GDP per year. Germany's new chancellor, Olaf Scholz, described Germany's foreign policy volte face on defence policy as a Zeitenwende, literally a turning point. EU leaders have also agreed to give EUR500m in arms and aid to Ukraine's military, and are sending heavy weaponry. The debate on whether to raise EU strategic autonomy via the development of an EU military capability will be reinvigorated, pushed in particular by the French president, Emmanuel Macron.
European powers will seek to become more assertive on the world stage Europe will be forced to decide where it stands in the new global order. The war in Ukraine is a wake-up call for Europe, confirming that it, rather than the US or Russia, needs to be able to influence what happens on its own continent. The US will remain by far the dominant power in the NATO alliance, but the balance is likely to shift in coming years, as European powers-led by France and Germany-become more serious about asserting their interests. Russia's invasion of Ukraine provoked an unprecedented show of unity from the NATO powers, but there are already signs that unity might fray over time as national and regional interests come to the fore again. Turkey in particular is likely to see continued frictions with other NATO members.
Rather than reducing NATO's footprint in Europe, Russia's actions have given NATO a new lease of life. In particular, Finland and Sweden have decided that their non-alignment is no longer a tenable choice, and applied for membership. Not only does this signify a major ideological shift, it also has practical security implications. Their accession will significantly expand NATO's capabilities on Russia's doorstep, in particular in the Baltic Sea, along the 800-mile Finland-Russia land border and in the Arctic Circle. We consider the risk of direct Russia-NATO conflict to be low, given the lack of appetite on both sides and the fact that Russia's near-term military focus is on Ukraine. However, Russia may retaliate using means short of direct conflict, including hybrid or cyber-warfare.
The end of Finland and Sweden's long-held neutrality is symbolic of the world's increasing division into opposing camps, led by the US on one side and China on the other. NATO's purpose had become unclear in recent years, with the US focusing increasingly on countering China's rising economic, technological and military power while Europe was developing its own concept of "strategic autonomy" in the economic, political and military spheres. However, Russia's invasion of Ukraine has galvanised the US into strengthening NATO under its own leadership, with a focus on countering the threat from Russia as well as China in a manner reminiscent of the cold war era. The US expects nations to choose sides based on shared values, which will accelerate the decoupling of the global economy between US-led and China-aligned camps (with Russia firmly in the latter).
EU enlargement has become a high priority issue in view of the Ukraine war The question of EU enlargement has returned to the top of the political agenda, with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskyi, calling for "the immediate accession of Ukraine [to the EU] via a new special procedure" on February 28th. Suggesting that EU membership is a process that would take decades, on May 9th Mr Macron called for the creation of a "European political community" as a way to provide some benefits of closer co-operation in the meantime. Then, on June 16th, on a visit to Kiev the heads of state of France, Germany, Italy and Romania stated their support for Ukraine to be granted EU candidate status, and the following day the European Commission issued a recommendation of the same. The move represents a significant step forward for Ukraine's Western ambitions. However, progress will be subject to unanimous approval at the Council of the European Union; formal accession talks (which could take decades); and progress on anticorruption and the rule of law.
Moldova and Georgia also applied to join the EU in the immediate aftermath of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. On June 17th the Commission recommended that Moldova should also be granted candidate status but advised Georgia to make further reforms first. These developments are significant because EU enlargement has appeared stuck in recent years, with voters in western Europe concerned about the impact of new member states on immigration and employment, and high-level concerns about how the bloc's institutions would cope. With EU accession appearing to be off the cards, however, the EU was losing its political leverage in the region, and risking these countries pursuing different geopolitical alliances. Progress in the case of Ukraine changes this narrative, but will also bring pressure for results for other, longer-standing EU candidate states (Albania, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia), as well as those in the western Balkans who have not attained it (Bosnia and Herecegovina) or have yet to apply (Kosovo, which plans to do so later this year). Turkey has been a candidate member for more than 20 years, but has long since abandoned its accession aspirations.
Security risks have risen elsewhere in eastern Europe in response to the war The war in Ukraine has increased tensions in eastern Europe's breakaway regions of Transdniestr (Moldova), Abkhazia and South Ossetia (Georgia), and Nagorny Karabakh (Azerbaijan). Russia has long been the security guarantor in these regions and has used its position to boost its leverage against EU and NATO expansion. The initial setbacks of the Russian army in Ukraine were seen as an opportunity in Azerbaijan to act from a position of strength and put pressure on Armenia for a permanent peace resolution on Azerbaijan's terms. Although we do not expect a return to hot conflict, the pro-Western orientation of Georgia and Moldova, combined with Russia's weakened ability to prop up separatists regimes there, has increased the risk of instability. In the western Balkans, concerns have risen that Russia may try to destabilise the situation in Bosnia and Hercegovina, and the war has resulted in increased tensions between Serbia and Kosovo.
Political outlook: Election watch In the second quarter of 2022 elections were held in Hungary, Serbia, France and Slovenia. In Hungary the ruling right-wing Fidesz-Hungarian Civic Union won the parliamentary election on April 3rd amid high voter turnout, securing a two-thirds majority for a fourth consecutive four-year term. The ruling party benefited from numerous pre-election fiscal handouts, a poorly run opposition campaign and an uneven playing field, particularly with regard to media access. Its supermajority means that it can continue to amend the constitution, enact key legislation and appoint leaders to nominally independent state institutions without the consent of opposition parties.
On the same day, the ruling conservative Serbian Progressive Party (SNS) won the snap parliamentary election in Serbia, and the president, Aleksandar Vucic, was re-elected. This will mean a continuation of the status quo, with support for modernising Serbia's economy and joining the EU, alongside a robust defence of national sovereignty and the pursuit of good relations with Russia and China. However, the government is likely to come under more serious scrutiny owing to a relatively good showing for the opposition.
Macron is the first French president in 20 years to win a second term in office In France Mr Macron was re-elected for a second presidential term at the election on April 24th, after a second-round run-off with the same far-right candidate as in 2017, Marine Le Pen. The effectiveness of Mr Macron's second term was, however, dealt a blow by the outcome of legislative elections on June 19th. His party, Renaissance (formerly La République en marche), and its allies failed to win a parliamentary majority, and will now have to either convince the (reluctant) centre-right party to co-operate or govern as a minority administration, dependent on building support in parliament on an ad hoc basis in order to pass legislation. This points to a much less effective second term, with Mr Macron's proposed reform programme likely to be slow to be passed and substantially watered down.
The parliamentary election on April 24th in Slovenia resulted in a win for the green-liberal centre-left Freedom Party, led by Robert Golob. With more seats in parliament than any other party since the country's independence, the new government is set to be stable and effective. We expect a sharp policy shift compared with the right-wing government led by Janez Jansa, resulting in an easing of tensions with the EU. The incoming government plans to repeal the most controversial laws passed by its predecessor, and introduce support measures to address the cost-of-living crisis, financed by raising taxes.
The next upcoming European election is the parliamentary vote in Sweden in September. We expect a centre-right government to replace the existing centre-left minority administration, although coalition-building is likely to be difficult as Sweden's consensus-based policymaking, centred on "bloc politics", has eroded in recent years. The centre-right bloc is divided over whether to co-operate with the far-right Sweden Democrats, but is currently less fractured than the centre-left bloc. The change in government is likely to lead to a tougher policy stance on immigration, some income tax cuts and a greater focus on strengthening defence capabilities.
Election watch
  Presidential Parliamentary
Albania 2027 2025
Armenia 2025 2026
Austria 2022 2024
Azerbaijan 2025 2025
Belarus 2025 2023
Belgium - 2024
Bosnia and Hercegovina 2022 2022
Bulgaria 2025 2025
Croatia 2025 2024
Cyprus a 2023 2026
Czech Republic 2023 2025
Denmark - 2023
Estonia 2026 b 2023
Finland 2024 2023
France 2027 2027
Georgia 2024 2024
Germany 2027 b 2025
Greece 2025 b 2023
Hungary 2027 b 2026
Iceland 2024 2025
Ireland 2025 2024
Italy 2029 b 2023
Kazakhstan 2024 2026
Kyrgyz Republic 2027 2026
Latvia 2023 2022
Lithuania 2024 2024
Luxembourg - 2023
Malta 2024 b 2027
Moldova 2024 2023
Montenegro 2023 2024
Netherlands - 2025
North Macedonia 2024 2024
Norway - 2025
Poland 2025 2023
Portugal 2026 2023
Romania 2024 2025
Russia 2024 2026
Serbia 2027 2027
Slovakia 2024 2024
Slovenia 2027 2026
Spain - 2023
Sweden - 2022
Switzerland - 2023
Tajikistan 2027 2025
Turkey 2023 2023
Turkmenistan 2024 2023
UK - 2024
Ukraine 2024 2024
Uzbekistan 2026 2024
a Republic of Cyprus. b Indirectly elected.
Macroeconomic policy Combating the energy price spike is the top policy priority in Europe The most urgent matter concerning economic policymakers in Europe is the spike in the energy prices as a result of the war in Ukraine. Gas makes up about 20% of the energy mix in Europe but has a disproportionate effect on electricity costs because of how these are calculated. High energy spot prices have translated to higher costs for households and firms, adding to broad-based inflationary pressures. Many European countries have announced government support measures to shield those most at risk from high inflation. Almost all countries are handing out cash transfers to low-income households. Exemptions or reductions of value-added tax (VAT) on energy, or other household necessities, are also widespread.
These policy tools are unlikely to result in a significant easing of inflationary pressures, but they will help to support low-income households to some extent, and ease domestic political pressure for government action. However, household subsidies and a lower tax burdens will ensure that demand-side pressures remain high, adding to the risk of an energy goods shortage by year-end. Extra-budgetary spending will complicate government efforts to consolidate the public finances after two years of pandemic-related spending.
Europe is aiming to reduce its energy dependence on Russia rapidly Security and geopolitical considerations will accelerate Europe's energy transition over the medium term, as the war in Ukraine has highlighted the risks of the region's dependence on Russian fossil fuels. The REPowerEU plan sets out measures to diversify Europe's energy supply, reduce overall demand for energy and accelerate the transition to green power; it envisages about EUR300bn in spending overall. The redirection of global liquefied natural gas (LNG) supplies to Europe to replace Russian gas supply is an important component, and will require a complex diplomatic effort, which the EU will co-ordinate by setting up a single platform. REPowerEU also aims to build resilience in the EU's existing gas infrastructure, for example by increasing the interconnection of the European grid between Spain and France, and between the Baltic states and the rest of the EU. It also proposes incorporating Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia and the western Balkans into this strategy.
The European Commission's proposed energy efficiency commitments are ambitious, increasing the mandate for energy efficiency savings from 9% to 13%. However, much of this is to be accomplished by retrofitting buildings and replacing gas boilers with electric heat pumps, an expensive and time-consuming process that is unlikely to significantly reduce energy demand this winter. The EU is therefore mandating that gas storage reach 80% of capacity by November 1st (with an ambition to reach 85%), and the legal requirement will rise to 90% by 2023. The Commission acknowledges in its communiqué that energy shortages are a material risk this winter, and is preparing contingencies at EU level and encouraging national governments to do the same. However, on two of the most contentious issues related to increasing energy security-delaying the phase-out of coal and expanding the use of nuclear power-the plan is largely silent, confirming that these issues remain politically sensitive.
Europe is aiming to reduce its energy dependence on Russia rapidly At the EU level, the process of imposing sanctions on Russia is continuing. The fifth sanctions package, imposed on April 8th, aims to further restrict Russian trade, targeting exports of coal and imports of advanced technology, and adding new logistical restrictions. Russia-EU trade was already severely disrupted as a result of mutually closed off airspace and global shipping companies' refusal to load and unload at Russian ports. The ban on Russian vessels entering EU ports and Russian-registered vehicles entering the EU exacerbates logistical problems. The sixth package, imposed on June 3rd, places a ban on Russian oil exports (albeit with some exemptions, and subject to transition periods) and restricts Russian imports of chemicals that could be used to make chemical weapons.
As the side-effects of sanctions start to bite in Europe, the process of maintaining EU unity is becoming harder. Hungary, in particular, voiced strong opposition to the oil embargo plans. This fragmentation of support is a trend that is likely to become more evident as the costs to EU member states mount. Moreover, Russian retaliation is increasingly likely, with a growing number of gas supply cut-offs in the second quarter of 2022, including total cut-offs to Poland and Bulgaria, and partial cut-offs to Denmark, the Netherlands, Germany and Italy. The Baltic states imposed their own ban on gas imports from Russia in early April, and overall the EU aims to reduce Russian gas usage by two-thirds by end-2022. Still, a complete and prolonged cut-off of gas supplies to multiple large markets in Europe would have a severe economic impact this winter, probably prompting rationing of gas for industrial usage and a deep recession.
Macroeconomic policy: Fiscal policy Public finances (% GDP) 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
EU27
Government expenditure 51.6 49.1 47.4 47.0 46.8 46.6
Government revenue 45.7 45.3 45.0 45.0 45.0 45.1
Budget balance -5.9 -3.8 -2.4 -2.0 -1.7 -1.5
Government debt 92.5 89.7 87.7 86.5 85.3 84.1
Euro area
Government expenditure 52.3 49.6 47.8 47.4 47.2 47.1
Government revenue 46.0 45.6 45.3 45.3 45.4 45.4
Budget balance -6.2 -4.0 -2.5 -2.1 -1.8 -1.6
Government debt 100.2 97.3 95.1 94.1 93.0 91.9
UK
Government expenditure 44.7 42.4 41.8 41.6 41.8 42.0
Government revenue 36.2 37.0 37.6 37.9 38.5 38.6
Budget balance -8.5 -5.4 -4.2 -3.7 -3.4 -3.3
Government debt 103.6 101.4 100.7 100.0 100.0 99.8
Data based on national definitions.
The EU is taking steps to mitigate the impact of the war in Ukraine on consumers and businesses. As in the case of the coronavirus, EU state aid rules have been relaxed to help companies that are facing a sharp increase in input prices. The EU's fiscal rules have also been suspended for another year, until 2024, to give member states more flexibility. This will be important not just to enable government responses to the rising cost-of-living crisis, but also to cover the costs of refugees. EU member states have agreed on a temporary mechanism to enable Ukrainian refugees to live and work in the bloc for up to three years without complex asylum procedures. The UN estimates that by early June 7.5m refugees had left the country, 90% of which are women and children. Poland has taken in the largest share, at an estimated 3.9m refugees, with Romania, Moldova, Hungary and Slovakia also significant destinations.
Before war broke out, the Commission had already begun a debate over the future of the EU's fiscal rules, as set by the Stability and Growth Pact, which provide indicative limits for national deficits (3% of GDP) and debt (60% of GDP). These have been in abeyance since the pandemic began. They have long been criticised for being opaque and inconsistently applied, and for imposing a sometimes inappropriate focus on austerity. In the context of the recovery from the pandemic and the need for greater investment in the green transition, the arguments for more flexibility in state expenditure have become louder. The additional burden of higher defence spending in the wake of the war in Ukraine will lend credence to these arguments for more latitude. However, reaching agreement on an alternative system will be very difficult. A familiar division between the "frugal four" economies of Austria, the Netherlands, Denmark and Sweden, which aim to narrow their deficits sharply in 2022-23, and France, Spain and Italy, which intended to run shortfalls in excess of 5% of GDP may come to the fore again.
High debt levels will be the new normal in western Europe in the 2020s Public debt ratios increased by an average of almost 20 percentage points in western Europe in 2020, with contingent liabilities also rising as governments provided loan guarantees. In 2021 the economic recovery generated a rise in revenue alongside a reduction of expenditure on automatic stabilisers and a gradual phasing-out of support measures. Fiscal consolidation will be more rapid in northern Europe than in southern Europe, with a multi-year adjustment over our forecast period (2022-26). EIU expects those countries with debt/GDP ratios over 100% in 2020 (Belgium, Cyprus, Spain, France, Greece, Italy, Portugal and the UK) to see only a very slow decline; debt burdens in those countries that remained below this threshold will ease more quickly. The role of central banks in backstopping government debt will continue in the medium term. More broadly, higher debt levels will become the new normal for western Europe in the 2020s, while new debt issuance will become more expensive as interest rates rise.
Drawdowns from the European recovery fund will drive investment in 2022 As national fiscal support plans wind down, inflows from the EU recovery fund will become more important. The fund entails unprecedented joint debt issuance (worth EUR750bn, or US$893bn), to be channelled to the less-developed economies in the bloc and those hardest hit by the pandemic, of which EUR390bn will be transferred as grants. Disbursements began in August 2021, and we expect their economic impact to become more apparent in 2022. The funds will be disbursed in 2021-26, with drawdowns peaking in 2024, but their release will depend on strict implementation of reforms and investment subject to close scrutiny by EU member states. Drawdowns from the EUR1.1trn EU budget for 2021-27 are also now under way.
IMF support was essential to some east European countries in 2020 The risk of sovereign debt crises is more significant in eastern Europe, and the necessity for fiscal consolidation more urgent. Economies in the Balkans and Central Asia depend on remittance inflows from migrant workers, which have been disrupted during the pandemic. These states also owe large debts to China, which they will struggle to repay. Some of the more vulnerable and weaker economies in this region turned to the IMF for support in 2020, and some may be forced to do so again in 2022, especially those that are dependent on tourism (such as Montenegro, in the western Balkans), which will suffer again as a result of the conflict in Ukraine.
Public debt in Turkey remains low, but Turkish corporates are highly indebted in foreign currency. This exposes them to bouts of currency volatility, as seen in 2018 and again in late 2021 when the Turkish lira tumbled in response to the Central Bank of Turkey's continued loose monetary policy. The weakness of the lira will push up the debt levels of the government and the private sector, as a large part of these debts are owed to foreign lenders and/or denominated in foreign currency. Turkey's economy depends on continuing flows of capital from abroad, including bank lending and investments in Turkish bonds, in order to meet its external debt obligations. It has already become expensive for the government and the private sector to borrow from abroad. The longer the current policies remain in force and the market volatility persists, the greater the risk of an eventual foreign-exchange shortage will become. The risk of a balance-of-payments crisis is extremely high.
Macroeconomic policy: Monetary policy and exchange rates Interest rates (av; %) 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Euribor -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate 0.1 1.7 3.5 3.1 3.0 3.0
US 10-year government bond yield 1.4 3.5 5.1 4.7 4.7 4.7
10-year German government bond yield -0.3 0.8 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4
Surging inflation is forcing the European Central Bank (ECB) to adopt a more aggressive approach. Inflation across the euro zone reached 8.1% year on year in May, well above the ECB's target of 2%, and will remain elevated well into 2023. Energy and food costs are the most prominent driver of inflation, but core price pressures are strengthening and wage growth has started to pick up. At its most recent monetary policy meeting on June 6th, the ECB announced that it would end quantitative easing (QE) on July 1st and would begin to raise interest rates from July. We expect the ECB to act decisively in front-loading rate increases rather than pursuing a gradual approach. We expect it to raise the deposit rate four times in 2022, by 25 basis points in July, 50 points in September and October, and 25 points in December. We forecast two more rate increases of 25 basis points each in 2023, with short-term rates settling between 1.5% and 2%, in line with current estimates for neutral rates in the euro zone.
The ECB seems less concerned about slowing economic growth than spiralling inflation, and ready to tolerate tighter financing conditions even if the euro zone enters a new downturn. However, there is a risk that excessive financial market volatility will prompt the ECB to slow its monetary policy tightening cycle. Following a massive sell-off in south European bond markets in early June, the ECB announced at an emergency meeting that a new anti-fragmentation tool was under preparation. We expect the new instrument to be announced in July. This will come on top of the only instrument the ECB has left against the widening of yield spreads-the reinvestment of redemptions coming due in the pandemic emergency purchase programme, which will be conducted in a flexible way and continue until at least the end of 2024.
Central banks across the region are now tightening policy Other central banks are also raising rates. The Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary and Romania were among the first countries in the region to start tightening monetary policy; the Bank of England raised its key policy interest rate by 25 basis points from 0.75% at its May 5th meeting, following identical increases at its previous three meetings. Even the Swiss National Bank announced a surprise rate rise on June 16th, which means that Switzerland no longer has the lowest policy rate in the world. Concerns about an appreciating currency raising deflationary pressures have been superseded by the need to contain rising prices.
We expect the euro to depreciate against the dollar in 2022 The euro has depreciated sharply against the US dollar since the start of 2022, reaching US$1.04:EUR1 in mid-June. This reflects increased investor concerns in the aftermath of Russia's invasion of Ukraine and a growing divergence between the monetary policy stances of the ECB and the Federal Reserve (Fed, the US central bank), with the Fed tightening monetary policy more aggressively. In the remainder of 2022 we expect the euro to partly recover against the dollar as the ECB begins to raise interest rates, closing the year at about US$1.11:EUR1. However, the euro area's weaker growth outlook and a pace of monetary tightening that is considerably slower than in the US will continue to weigh on the value of the single currency in the short term. We expect a more sustained appreciatory trend to begin in 2023, when the interest-rate differential with the US narrows. Over the medium term, the value of the single currency will continue to be supported by a structural current-account surplus.
The value of other European currencies have been affected by a "flight to safety" since Russia's invasion of Ukraine, as well as the comparatively early start of monetary policy tightening in the US. Some east European countries have seen substantial currency depreciation in 2022 as a consequence, and those with fixed exchange rates (such as Bulgaria, Montenegro, and Bosnia and Hercegovina) may need to tap into their foreign-exchange reserves to defend these, leading to increased balance-of-payments risks. Depreciation of the Turkish lira is fuelling inflation, to 73.5% in May. The central bank policy rate remains at just 14%, and the authorities regard this inflation as temporary. The government appears mainly concerned with maintaining economic activity through cheap credit ahead of the elections due in June 2023.
Rouble depreciation has been limited by capital controls Amid the invasion of Ukraine, the Russian rouble lost about 70% of its value between February 23rd and March 9th. However, as the Central Bank of Russia's tight capital controls began to take effect, the rouble appreciated to pre-war levels. The convertibility of the currency remains heavily limited inside Russia, which has also contributed to its relative stability. As the exchange rate has stabilised, the central bank has modestly loosened restrictions, which are likely to return the rouble to a slight depreciatory trend. The conversion of European payments for gas into roubles, as well as strong import suppression, will support the currency. In 2022 we expect an average nominal depreciation of about 2% from 2021. Risks are tilted to the downside, however.
Exchange rates (av) 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
US$:€ 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
¥:€ 129.9 132.7 142.6 149.3 146.9 146.6
£:€ 0.86 0.83 0.85 0.87 0.86 0.84
Economic forecast   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%)            
US 5.7 2.5 1.9 1.7 1.9 1.7
Japan 1.6 2.8 1.4 1.5 1.2 1.1
World (market exchange rates) 5.7 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.6 2.6
World (PPP exchange rate) 6.0 3.4 3.5 3.3 3.1 3.1
World trade growth (%)            
Goods 10.5 4.2 4.8 4.1 3.7 3.6
Consumer price inflation (%)            
US 4.7 7.2 2.8 2.1 2.1 2.1
Japan -0.2 1.8 1.2 0.7 0.9 0.8
Export price inflation            
Manufactures (US$) 5.8 1.3 2.8 2.6 2.4 1.9
Commodities            
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 70.4 105.6 89.4 76.5 70.5 66.5
Non-oil commodities 37.9 23.6 -8.3 -6.1 -4.9 -3.1
Food, feedstuffs and beverages 36.1 26.4 -11.2 -8.9 -5.7 -3.9
Industrial raw materials 40.4 19.9 -4.0 -2.3 -3.9 -2.1
Interest rates (%)            
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av) 0.1 1.7 3.5 3.1 3.0 3.0
¥ 2-month private bill rate (av) 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
€ 3-month interbank rate (av) -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
US 10-year government bond yield (av) 1.4 3.5 5.1 4.7 4.7 4.7
10-year German government bond yield (av) -0.3 0.8 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4
Exchange rates            
US$:€ (av) 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2
¥:€ (av) 129.9 132.7 142.6 149.3 146.9 146.6
£:€ (av) 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.8
¥:US$ (av) 109.8 120.9 124.8 124.9 119.5 117.8
£:US$ (av) 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.5
The European economy is slowing sharply, given multiple headwinds The European economy is facing a variety of headwinds at present. Surging inflation is weighing on consumers' purchasing power and damaging business sentiment. External demand is slowing as the US begins its monetary tightening cycle and China continues its zero-covid policy, while spillover effects from the war in Ukraine damage growth around the world via higher commodity prices and disrupted supply chains. EIU also assumes that one more variant of covid-19 will emerge in 2022, denting growth later this year.
We expect real GDP in the euro zone to return to its pre-pandemic size in 2022 on average, but have revised down our forecast for growth this year from 4% prior to Russia's invasion of Ukraine to 2.3%. Real quarterly GDP growth in the EU was 0.4% in January-March 2022, and a contraction is likely in several countries in the second quarter, with technical recessions this year likely in major economies including France and Germany. Headline growth figures for 2022 will be misleading. Carryover effects from strong growth in 2021 mean that, even with minimal quarterly growth, most euro zone economies will register strong annual growth rates this year.
The economic impact of the Russia-Ukraine war will be asymmetric The economic impact of the conflict will be felt unevenly across the region. Ukraine and Russia will both experience a deep recession this year. East European countries and businesses that are most exposed to trade with Russia will take a hit from the conflict, but even countries with few direct trade ties to Russia will be affected. An influx of refugees fleeing Ukraine to neighbouring Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania and Moldova will damage these countries' public finances, but may boost domestic consumption and lift long-term demographic prospects (in otherwise ageing economies). The conflict is also a risk for the Turkish economy, given its financial fragility and high dependence on imported oil and gas and tourism from Russia and Ukraine.
Surging inflation is the biggest constraint on growth at present The most widespread constraint on growth across the region, however, is inflation. Consumer price growth accelerated to 8.1% in the euro zone in May as energy prices continued to rise, along with prices of industrial raw materials, food, and a wide array of goods and services. This is holding back consumer spending, as purchasing power takes a hit and consumers ease back on major purchases, and it is damaging industrial production. Shortages of vital automotive components had emerged in Germany and central European countries before the crisis, but the war has worsened the situation. We expect disruptions to trade (and global shortages of semiconductors and shipping containers) to last into 2023, dampening European manufacturing activity.
Russia is disrupting gas supplies to Europe, and this could prove severe The most significant risk to the European economic outlook is a major cut-off of Russian gas supplies, in retaliation to the imposition of Western sanctions. So far, Russia has cut off gas supplies completely to Poland and Bulgaria, and partially to Denmark, the Netherlands, Germany and Italy. The disruption to Germany's gas supply also has knock-on effects elsewhere, as several central European countries receive gas via Germany. Still, these disruptions are limited and so manageable. However, should Russia decide to cut gas supplies to multiple large European markets simultaneously, and for a prolonged period of time, then we would expect a deep recession across the region.
Real GDP (% change) 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
World (market exchange rates) 5.7 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.6 2.6
US 5.7 2.5 1.9 1.7 1.9 1.7
Japan 1.6 2.8 1.4 1.5 1.2 1.1
UK 7.4 3.6 0.5 1.9 1.7 1.8
EU27 5.4 3.3 2.5 2.0 2.0 1.9
Old EU14 5.4 3.2 2.3 1.9 1.8 1.8
Euro area 5.4 3.2 2.4 2.0 1.8 1.8
Energy prices will remain high as long as the conflict rages in Ukraine. European gas prices will rise by at least 60% this year, after a fivefold increase in 2021, and oil prices will remain above US$100/barrel. The EU ban on seaborne Russian oil imports and uncertainty surrounding supplies will exacerbate existing market tightness. For emerging countries that rely heavily on Russian and Ukrainian grain supplies, food insecurity is another major risk. The fighting and the blockade of Ukrainian ports by Russia have halted exports of grains, and as both countries account for about a third of global wheat trade, prices of wheat, as well as maize, barley and rapeseed, are soaring. Meat and dairy producers will take a hit, as Ukrainian maize is widely used to feed livestock (globally, 60% of maize is used for livestock feed), and European farmers rely heavily on Russia and Belarus for fertilisers.
Russia will experience a deep recession, but Ukraine will be far worse hit We forecast that Russia will experience a deep recession in 2022 as a result of its war with Ukraine and the international sanctions. However, we do not expect a collapse of the Russian economy, which has shown resilience and will be supported by its sizeable domestic market and production. The impact of sanctions will be uneven and will hit certain regions and economic sectors harder. Nevertheless, the shock to the economy will result in a sizeable contraction in real GDP this year, which we forecast at 10%.
The impact of the war on Ukraine will be much more significant. The war will destroy infrastructure, physical capital and productive capacity, with the working-age population fleeing the conflict. This will particularly affect Ukraine's main drivers of growth, such as food and metallurgical exports, and the relevant infrastructure needed to produce them. Road and rail networks are severely damaged, as the Ukrainian army has strategically destroyed key bridges and road signs, and blocked highways to halt the Russian advance. Energy infrastructure, including power stations, gas pipelines and depots, has also been targeted as the Russian forces lay siege and encircle Ukrainian cities to the east. The destruction of buildings and infrastructure mean that retail activity will be non-existent in war-torn areas.
We expect the war to plunge Ukraine's economy into the worst economic recession since the country's independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Estimates derived from tax and energy data suggest that one-third of all economic activity in the country has been suspended, with the rest operating at limited capacity, leading to a halving of daily economic activity. We expect real GDP to contract by 35.5% in 2022. Assuming that the war continues throughout the forecast period, albeit at a weaker intensity from 2023 onwards, the economy will rebound in 2023 by 9.1% owing to the reconstruction effort, supported by an influx of development aid. However, a full recovery thereafter is unlikely owing to Russia's aim to cripple Ukrainian infrastructure and the continuous blocking of Ukraine's ports in the Black Sea, inhibiting export flows. We do not expect real GDP to reach to pre-war levels before 2037.
There will be knock-on effects from the war across eastern Europe The knock-on impact of the Ukraine war and the Russian recession will be substantial in eastern Europe. A drop in Russian export demand will be most felt in the Baltic states, and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and Caucasus region. Although financial integration with Russia is low, the crisis will lead to a shortfall in remittances to CIS and Caucasus countries, and has already caused sharp currency depreciations. A refugee crisis-with more than 7m people already displaced outside Ukraine-will have a severe impact on public finances in central Europe, but may boost domestic consumption in the recipient countries. Surging wheat prices also endanger food security in the western Balkans, and the CIS and Caucasus region. Food accounts for a larger share of income in developing countries, and a higher food bill will depress household consumption. It could also jeopardise political stability.
The Baltic countries are the most exposed to the Russian downturn (particularly Lithuania and Latvia), both because they have deep trade links with Russia and because their economies are highly open to trade. Direct exports to Russia account for 5% of Baltic GDP on average, and 2% of GDP for the CIS and Caucasus region (although Armenia's exposure is 5.7% of GDP). Central and eastern Europe (CEE) is less exposed, but direct exports to Russia still account for about 1.1% of GDP, which is significant given the magnitude of the contraction expected. Supply-chain contagion will also dent export growth. Machinery and vehicles account for about a quarter of Russian imports, and countries that supply components used in the production of these goods (mostly CEE countries) will suffer a further contraction in exports. Direct financial spillover effects on eastern Europe are likely to be limited. This reflects the low degree of financial development in the region, where there are no prominent banking groups with cross-border exposure to Russia. Remittances are an exception: Russia is a prominent source of remittances (US$22.2bn in 2019), predominantly to CIS countries, and these will be hit when its economy falls into recession.
The Turkish economy is very exposed to the war in Ukraine. A prolonged conflict in Ukraine could seriously damage Turkey's already fragile economy. Even assuming a rapid pacification of Ukraine and an end to all-out war, rising financial risk aversion, higher global prices for energy and other commodities, and a decline in tourist arrivals from Russia and Ukraine, which accounted for over 27% of all foreign visitors, could put renewed pressure on Turkey's balance of payments and the currency. Turkey's macroeconomic imbalances, the volatile lira, high inflation and unpredictable economic policymaking all present major downside risks.
Economic forecast: Inflation (% change unless otherwise indicated) 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Consumer price inflation (%)
World 8.0 4.9 3.4 3.2 3.3 3.2
EU27 2.8 7.1 3.3 2.0 2.0 1.9
Old EU14 2.5 6.7 2.9 1.8 1.8 1.8
Euro area 2.5 6.8 2.9 1.8 1.8 1.8
UK 2.5 7.2 4.4 2.1 2.0 1.9
Export price inflation (%)
Manufactures 5.8 1.3 2.8 2.6 2.4 1.9
Commodities
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 70.4 105.6 89.4 76.5 70.5 66.5
World non-oil commodities (US$) 37.9 23.6 -8.3 -6.1 -4.9 -3.1
 Food, feedstuffs and beverages 36.1 26.4 -11.2 -8.9 -5.7 -3.9
 Industrial raw materials 40.4 19.9 -4.0 -2.3 -3.9 -2.1
The war has unleashed a commodity price spiral, fuelling inflation The war in Ukraine and the resulting sanctions on Russia have sent prices for energy and agricultural and metal commodities soaring. This has added to the effect of pandemic-related supply-chain disruptions. Moreover, cost pressures in Europe have become increasingly broad-based as surging producer prices have been passed on to final consumers, and as inflation expectations have risen and wage rises have started to pick up.
We expect oil prices to average US$105.6/barrel in 2022, and natural gas prices to see a dramatic rise as the security of supply from Russia becomes increasingly uncertain. Russia is also a major producer of base metals (aluminium, titanium, palladium and nickel), all of which will register sharp price increases in 2022. In the EU, raw materials make up the second-highest share of primary goods imports from Russia (5% in 2021) after energy (62%). Excess savings, tax cuts and direct financial support to households will mitigate the negative impact on disposable incomes, but only to a certain extent. With wage growth running well below consumer price inflation, households' purchasing power will be eroded, dampening overall economic growth (private consumption accounted for about 52% of EU GDP in 2021).
Average inflation in the euro zone reached 8.1% in May. The impact of higher energy prices will be felt unevenly across the region, depending on the structure of the domestic energy market, the energy share in the inflation basket across countries, the country-specific energy mix and national governments' mitigating policies. Food prices are also an important driver of headline inflation in the euro area (food accounts for almost 20% of the euro area consumption basket in 2022). A sharp rise in agricultural commodity prices will disproportionately affect lower-income households (which are concentrated in Europe's southern regions), as these tend to spend a higher proportion of their income on food. The Baltic states, the Netherlands, Greece and Slovakia all recorded double-digit inflation in May. Further east, even higher rates are being published: we expect inflation to average 21% in Russia as a consequence of the war, and 62.2% in Turkey, where price pressures are being exacerbated by unorthodox monetary policy decisions.
Business environment rankings Business environment rankings
  2017-21   2022-26      
  Total score Global rank Total score Global rank Change in Change
  (out of 10) (out of 82) (out of 10) (out of 82) total score in rank
Switzerland 8.32 3 8.34 3 0.02 0
Germany 8.14 13 8.22 7 0.07 6
Denmark 8.35 2 8.31 4 -0.04 -2
Netherlands 8.30 4 8.08 10 -0.22 -6
Sweden 8.27 7 8.08 11 -0.19 -4
Norway 7.95 14 8.13 9 0.18 5
Finland 8.17 12 8.01 13 -0.16 -1
Ireland 8.21 9 7.96 15 -0.25 -6
France 7.73 17 7.92 17 0.19 0
Austria 7.76 16 7.76 20 0.00 -4
UK 7.81 15 7.84 18 0.03 -3
Estonia 7.50 23 7.59 24 0.09 -1
Czech Republic 7.29 27 7.52 25 0.23 2
Belgium 7.65 18 7.30 30 -0.35 -12
Spain 7.30 26 7.44 26 0.14 0
Poland 7.16 29 7.38 27 0.22 2
Slovenia 6.93 31 7.19 31 0.26 0
Lithuania 6.78 34 7.10 33 0.32 1
Cyprus 6.88 33 6.88 41 -0.01 -8
Slovakia 7.04 30 7.14 32 0.10 -2
Hungary 6.74 35 7.03 34 0.29 1
Greece 5.81 52 7.01 35 1.20 17
Portugal 6.93 32 7.00 36 0.07 -4
Italy 6.46 39 6.89 40 0.43 -1
Latvia 6.59 37 6.94 38 0.35 -1
Romania 6.44 40 6.89 39 0.46 1
Bulgaria 6.27 44 6.49 45 0.22 -1
Croatia 6.20 46 6.38 49 0.18 -3
Turkey 6.21 45 6.11 57 -0.10 -12
Business environment rankings cover 82 countries EIU's business environment rankings model seeks to measure the attractiveness of a country's business environment and its major components. The model's assessment of the business environment-based on the opportunities for and hindrances to the conduct of business-enables us to rank each of the 82 countries covered on its overall position and in each of 11 categories on a global and a regional basis. The model uses quantitative data and expert assessments to measure the attractiveness of countries' business environments. The framework has been designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies in formulating their global business strategies and investment location decisions. The overall scores (on a 1-10 scale) and rankings are based on scores for 91 indicators, grouped into a total of 11 categories.
The pandemic had a substantial negative effect on the macroeconomic context and market opportunities around the world, and now the war in Ukraine is having a negative impact on the recovery from the pandemic in 2022-26. Greater investment under the Next Generation EU recovery fund will provide some support to growth, and will gradually improve the region's infrastructure. Labour market scarring effects, however, may drag on scores, and government efforts to promote competition may flag in the face of the desire to support national (or in the case of the EU, regional) champions. The impact of the war in Ukraine will mainly be felt through a reorientation of trade, especially energy trade, away from Russia.
Western Europe is ranked second globally out of six regions, after North America, and eastern Europe is ranked fourth, after Asia and Australasia, but ahead of Latin America and the Middle East and Africa.
EU and Nordic countries score particularly well in our rankings EU countries remain well represented in the top 20 of our global rankings. Two non-EU countries, Switzerland and Norway, also occupy leading positions. The large number of countries in western Europe in the top 20 reflects the high degree of political stability in the region (social and political tensions notwithstanding), large and competitive domestic markets, and a strong degree of openness to world trade. Although we continue to highlight the risks of political fragmentation and rising anti-establishment sentiment, we do not forecast a significant anti-market backlash in policy choices.
The business environment in eastern Europe has improved since the 1990s The investment climate in central and eastern Europe has improved considerably in recent years. The early reformers among the countries of central Europe led the way in the early 1990s in adopting far-reaching stabilisation, liberalisation and privatisation programmes. Reform in the Balkans has been much more uneven and subject to periodic reversals, but significant progress has been made even there. Factors such as a low-cost-but well-qualified-labour force, proximity to developed markets, and, in some cases, ample natural-resource endowments have attracted considerable foreign direct investment to the region over the past decade. However, many east European countries still face fundamental reform challenges, including high levels of emigration, a declining workforce and a high social security burden. Meeting those challenges will test already fraying relations between governments and electorates, and heighten the risk of political instability and social unrest.
The outlook for the business environment in the countries of the former Soviet Union has taken a turn for the worse with Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the impact of which is reflected in our business environment rankings for the second quarter of 2022. Russia's business environment has suffered irreparable damage as a result of swingeing Western sanctions and the withdrawal from the country of many Western banks and businesses. Russia will suffer a major recession in 2022 and will be forced to turn to China for economic support in coming years. Ukraine's economy has been devastated by the war, but the country will benefit from major reconstruction aid in the coming years and the war may also engender a reform shock.
Data sources and definitions Methodology The forecast tables have been constructed from the individual data series available in the respective EIU Country Forecasts. In addition, EIU runs the National Institute's Global Econometric Model (NIGEM), which is developed and maintained by the London Business School at the National Institute of Economic and Social Research.
Sources GDP/GNP: IMF, IFS for local currency data, converted into dollars by the relevant year average exchange rate, also available in IFS
Exchange rates: IMF, IFS
Population: national statistical offices and IMF, IFS
GDP growth and inflation: relevant central banks or national statistical offices, also available in OECD, National Accounts
Abbreviations CEECs: Central and east European countries (excludes Russia and other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States)
ECB: European Central Bank
IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
UN: United Nations
Data summary: EU27a EU27 a
  2017 b 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Economic growth (%)                    
GDP 2.9 2.1 1.8 -6.1 5.4 3.3 2.5 2.0 2.0 1.9
Private consumption 2.3 1.8 1.6 -7.3 3.9 3.7 2.4 2.0 1.8 1.7
Government consumption 1.1 1.2 2.0 1.0 4.0 2.6 1.7 1.1 1.3 1.4
Gross investment 6.2 4.1 4.8 -8.6 7.3 5.8 4.7 2.7 2.7 2.6
Exports of goods & services d 6.1 3.8 3.0 -8.8 10.9 5.3 4.0 3.5 3.4 3.3
Imports of goods & services d 5.8 4.1 4.6 -8.5 9.3 6.5 4.8 3.7 3.4 3.4
Domestic demand 2.9 2.2 2.4 -5.9 4.7 3.9 2.8 1.9 1.9 1.9
Population, income and market size                    
Population (m) 443.6 443.9 444.0 444.0 444.1 446.4 445.3 444.4 443.6 442.7
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 14,770 15,991 15,700 15,279 17,094 17,436 18,628 20,214 21,705 22,841
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 33,296 36,028 35,363 34,409 38,491 39,059 41,833 45,486 48,926 51,592
Private consumption (US$ bn) 7,935 8,569 8,347 7,921 8,739 8,817 9,501 10,268 10,978 11,513
Private consumption per head (US$) 17,888 19,305 18,802 17,839 19,678 19,751 21,336 23,106 24,745 26,005
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 19,033 19,939 20,594 20,025 21,936 23,748 25,031 26,156 27,265 28,405
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 42,904 44,921 46,386 45,097 49,392 53,201 56,213 58,856 61,460 64,162
Wage and price inflation (%)                    
Consumer prices (av) 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.8 7.1 3.3 2.0 2.0 1.9
Average wages 3.0 4.4 3.9 3.1 2.9 5.2 3.9 3.2 3.2 3.1
Real wages 1.4 2.5 2.4 2.5 0.1 -1.9 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.2
Unit labour costs 4.0 8.1 -2.8 7.3 3.4 -3.4 4.7 5.3 4.5 3.0
Labour costs per hour (US$) 29.5 31.6 30.7 32.0 33.8 32.6 34.5 36.9 39.2 41.1
The labour market                    
Labour force (m) 213.3 214.0 215.1 213.1 214.0 215.3 215.1 214.6 214.0 212.9
Unemployment rate (%) 8.4 7.5 7.0 7.5 7.2 7.0 6.7 6.4 6.2 6.1
Current account (US$ bn)                    
Current-account balance 507.9 514.8 485.7 441.9 553.4 345.1 432.8 524.3 571.8 619.5
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.4 3.2 3.1 2.9 3.2 2.0 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.7
Trade balance 451.3 370.0 394.9 468.1 406.9 292.3 378.9 474.5 500.3 527.1
Services balance 194.2 249.8 191.4 125.7 275.4 188.8 229.2 261.6 298.0 344.3
Income balance 25.4 81.8 75.4 42.3 63.5 37.9 1.5 -28.5 -37.6 -51.3
Current transfers balance -162.7 -186.8 -176.1 -194.2 -191.7 -173.5 -177.1 -183.1 -188.6 -200.6
Memorandum items                    
Share of world population (%) 5.9 5.9 5.8 5.8 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.5
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rate) 18.4 18.8 18.2 18.2 18.1 17.5 17.6 18.1 18.4 18.7
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 15.8 15.6 15.5 15.3 15.2 15.1 15.0 14.8 14.7 14.8
a Comprises Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, and Sweden. b  EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts. d Includes intra-regional trade.
Data summary: Euro area Euro area a
  2017 b 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 b 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Economic growth (%)
GDP 2.7 1.8 1.6 -6.6 5.4 3.2 2.4 2.0 1.8 1.8
Private consumption 1.9 1.4 1.4 -8.0 3.5 3.7 2.2 1.9 1.6 1.5
Government consumption 1.1 1.0 1.8 1.0 4.0 2.6 1.6 1.2 1.2 1.3
Gross investment 5.3 3.4 5.5 -9.0 6.3 6.1 5.0 2.7 2.7 2.5
Exports of goods & services d 6.0 3.6 2.6 -9.5 11.1 5.3 3.7 3.6 3.3 3.1
Imports of goods & services d 5.5 3.7 4.7 -9.3 8.8 6.9 4.7 3.7 3.2 3.3
Domestic demand 2.5 1.8 2.4 -6.3 4.3 4.0 2.7 1.9 1.8 1.7
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 338.3 338.6 338.9 339.1 339.3 339.8 339.4 339.4 339.3 339.2
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 12,668 13,697 13,408 12,988 14,475 14,767 15,708 16,976 18,159 19,144
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 37,451 40,446 39,566 38,301 42,658 43,459 46,281 50,020 53,519 56,439
Private consumption (US$ bn) 6,826 7,353 7,143 6,737 7,393 7,441 7,970 8,560 9,107 9,542
Private consumption per head (US$) 20,182 21,713 21,079 19,866 21,787 21,899 23,482 25,223 26,839 28,131
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 15,537 16,229 16,690 16,102 17,606 19,033 20,011 20,889 21,721 22,571
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 45,932 47,924 49,249 47,483 51,886 56,013 58,958 61,550 64,015 66,544
Wage and price inflation (%)
Consumer prices (av) 1.5 1.7 1.2 0.2 2.5 6.8 2.9 1.8 1.8 1.8
Average wages 1.6 2.3 2.7 2.5 1.6 3.5 3.0 2.4 2.4 2.4
Real wages 0.1 0.5 1.5 2.3 -0.9 -3.1 0.1 0.6 0.6 0.6
Unit labour costs 3.0 6.8 -3.0 7.8 3.0 -4.5 3.9 4.3 3.9 2.6
Labour costs per hour (US$) 34.1 36.4 35.2 36.6 38.5 36.9 38.9 41.5 43.8 45.7
The labour market
Labour force (m) 163.2 163.9 164.8 162.9 164.2 164.4 164.3 164.1 163.8 163.3
Unemployment rate (%) 9.1 8.2 7.6 8.0 7.7 7.4 7.2 6.9 6.7 6.5
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 463.4 488.3 431.5 372.5 514.1 338.0 410.7 478.3 511.8 539.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.7 3.6 3.2 2.9 3.6 2.3 2.6 2.8 2.8 2.8
Trade balance 439.5 380.9 384.5 434.3 415.0 310.3 385.1 462.1 483.4 515.7
Services balance 121.8 169.3 111.2 63.2 182.7 91.9 107.0 132.4 155.2 172.7
Income balance 54.3 111.6 97.9 53.4 88.2 90.7 74.1 44.5 37.8 25.5
Current transfers balance -151.8 -173.6 -162.1 -178.5 -171.0 -154.4 -155.9 -160.6 -164.2 -174.8
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 4.5 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.4 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.2
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rate) 15.8 16.1 15.5 15.5 15.3 14.8 14.9 15.2 15.4 15.6
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 12.9 12.7 12.5 12.3 12.2 12.1 12.0 11.8 11.7 11.7
a Comprises Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts. d Includes intra-regional trade.
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows the EIU to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by the EIU for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2017-21) and from EIU assessments for the forecast period (2022-26). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by the EIU for 2017-21. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2022-26 are based on EIU assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; the EIU, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2017-21 ranges are then used to derive 2022-26 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2022-26, not to the likely situation in 2026 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2019 or 2024). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
List of indicators in the business rankings model Political environment 1. Risk of armed conflict
2. Risk of social unrest
3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power
4. Government and opposition
5. Threat of politically motivated violence
6. International disputes or tensions
7. Government policy towards business
8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution
9. Quality of the bureaucracy
10. Transparency and fairness of legal system
11. Efficiency of legal system
12. Corruption
13. Impact of crime
Macroeconomic environment *1. Inflation
*2. Budget balance as % of GDP
*3. Government debt as % of GDP
*4. Exchange-rate volatility
*5. Current-account balance as % of GDP
6. Quality of policymaking
7. Institutional underpinnings
8. Asset prices
Market opportunities *1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP
*2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP
*3. Real GDP growth
*4. Share of world merchandise trade
*5. Average annual rate of growth of exports
*6. Average annual rate of growth of imports
*7. The natural resource endowment
*8. Profitability
9. Regional integration
10. Proximity to markets
Policy towards private enterprise and competition 1. Degree to which private property rights are protected
2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses
3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete
4. Promotion of competition
5. Protection of intellectual property
6. Price controls
7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups
8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control
9. Minority shareholders
Policy towards foreign investment 1. Government policy towards foreign capital
2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences
3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets
4. Availability of investment protection schemes
5. Government favouritism
Foreign trade and exchange controls 1. Capital-account liberalisation
**2. Tariff and non-tariff protection
*3. Ease of trading
*4. Openness of trade
5. Restrictions on the current account
Taxes **1. The corporate tax burden
*2. The top marginal personal income tax
*3. Value-added tax
*4. Employers' social security contributions
5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment
6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system
7. Tax complexity
Financing 1. Health and soundness of banking sector
*2. Stockmarket capitalisation
*3. Distortions in financial markets
4. Quality of the financial regulatory system
5. Access of foreigners to local capital market
6. Access to medium-term finance for investment
The labour market *1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity
*2. Availability of skilled labour
3. Quality of workforce
4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs
*5. Health of the workforce
6. Level of technical skills
*7. Cost of living
*8. Incidence of strikes
9. Restrictiveness of labour laws
10. Extent of wage regulation
11. Hiring of foreign nationals
Infrastructure *1. Mobile network coverage
*2. Broadband connection speed
*3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution
*4. Extent and quality of road network
*5. Extent and quality of rail network
*6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure
*7. Quality of air transport infrastructure
*8. Reliability of electricity supply
*9. Rents of office space
Technological readiness *1. Patent applications
*2. Quality of e-commerce business environment
*3. Scope of e-government
*4. Cyber-security preparedness
*5. Internet use
*6. Mobile-phone subscriptions
*7. R&D as % of GDP
*8. Research infrastructure
Note. A single asterisk (*) denotes a purely quantitative indicator. Indicators with a double asterisk (**) are partly based on data. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.

Subject: Monetary policy; Foreign exchange rates; Politics; Pandemics; Population growth; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Inflation; Central banks; Eurozone; Purchasing power; Economic growth

Business indexing term: Subject: Monetary policy Foreign exchange rates Gross Domestic Product--GDP Inflation Central banks Eurozone Purchasing power Economic growth; Industry: 52111 :‎ Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Location: Europe; Western Europe

Company / organization: Name: European Central Bank; NAICS: 521110; Name: North Atlantic Treaty Organization--NATO; NAICS: 928120

Classification: 52111: Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Identifier / keyword: Europe; Western Europe

Title: Country Forecast Europe June 2022

Publication title: Country Forecast. European Union; New York

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science

ISSN: 17468760

e-ISSN: 20488092

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2714785985

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-europe-june-2022/docview/2714785985/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Greece June 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-greece-june-2022/docview/2714191868/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: [...]the multiple challenges facing the country and a possible return to a coalition government arrangement after the 2023 election suggest that political instability risk will remain high in 2022-26 (the forecast period). Economic outlook 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 8.0 4.0 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.9 Consumer price inflation (av, %) 0.6 7.0 2.8 2.1 1.5 1.5 Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.5 -4.9 -3.7 -3.3 -2.5 -1.8 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -5.9 -5.7 -5.6 -5.6 -6.5 -6.9 3-month Treasury rate (av; %) -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5 Exchange rate €:US$ (av) 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8 The ND government has made progress towards implementing its economic reform agenda and meeting Greece's commitments to its international creditors, but severe policy constraints will remain in place in 2022-26 and beyond, until the huge government debt is substantially reduced. Fact sheet Annual data 2021a Historical averages (%) 2017-21 Population (m) 10.4 Population growth -0.5 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 215.8b Real GDP growth 0.6 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 338.6b Real domestic demand growth 1.4 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 20,806 Inflation 0.3 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 32,646 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.8 Exchange rate (av) €:US$ 0.8b FDI inflows (% of GDP) 2.1 a EIU estimates. b Actual. In the medium to long term the main challenges will be putting Greece's public finances on a sustainable footing, diversifying economic activity to reduce overdependence on tourism, improving the business environment, reviving the privatisation programme and reducing Greek banks' still-high levels of non-performing loans.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Greece&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Greece+June+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-20&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Greece&amp;rft.issn=0966954X&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - The centre-right New Democracy (ND) administration led by Kyriakos Mitsotakis that was elected in mid-2019 is the first single-party government since the start of the Greek sovereign debt crisis more than a decade ago. This has helped to provide a more stable and effective government than its predecessor, a coalition led by the left-wing Syriza Coalition of the Radical Left-Progressive Alliance (Syriza). Nevertheless, the multiple challenges facing the country and a possible return to a coalition government arrangement after the 2023 election suggest that political instability risk will remain high in 2022-26 (the forecast period). Historical tensions between Greece and Turkey have intensified. EIU believes that both sides will aim to prevent tensions from escalating into military hostility, but the risk of conflict has increased.

Greece--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.78 7.06 53 33 18 14
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

- Greece's business environment score rises from 5.78 in the historical period (2017-21) to 7.06 in the forecast period (2022-26), pushing up its global ranking by 20 places, to 33rd. However, Greece is four places from the bottom of the regional ranking, at 14th. Greece's public debt is over 190% of GDP and the economy remains heavily reliant on tourism for growth and employment. The sector was especially hard hit by the coronavirus pandemic, but a solid recovery has been under way since 2021.

Greece--highlights: Economic outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 8.0 4.0 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.9
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 0.6 7.0 2.8 2.1 1.5 1.5
Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.5 -4.9 -3.7 -3.3 -2.5 -1.8
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -5.9 -5.7 -5.6 -5.6 -6.5 -6.9
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
Exchange rate €:US$ (av) 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8

- The ND government has made progress towards implementing its economic reform agenda and meeting Greece's commitments to its international creditors, but severe policy constraints will remain in place in 2022-26 and beyond, until the huge government debt is substantially reduced. General government debt was about 194% of GDP at end 2021, mainly owed to Greece's EU creditors, making another debt write-down-as happened in 2012-unlikely. In the short term the coronavirus pandemic and the surge in energy prices pose significant downside risks to growth, given the negative impact of the pandemic on tourism and the squeeze on household incomes from higher inflation. After the rebound in 2021 we forecast moderately robust real GDP growth of 4% in 2022 and 3% per year in 2023-26, reflecting in part our expectation that the EU recovery fund will support output as government support measures for households and businesses are gradually withdrawn. Greece's exit from the euro is not a short- or medium-term risk.

Greece--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2016 2021 2026
Total 10.6 10.4 10.1
 Male 5.2 5.1 5.0
 Female 5.4 5.3 5.1
Period averages (%)   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth   -0.5 -0.5
Working-age population growth   -0.8 -0.7
Labour force growth   -0.8 0.5

- According to UN projections, the population will decline by an average of 0.5% per year in 2022-26 (the forecast period). However, life expectancy is increasing, and in 2021 it was estimated to average 81.8 years-broadly in line with the EU27 average of 80.4 (2020). The population structure by age already bears all the hallmarks of the demographic ageing process, with the decline in the working-age population and rise in the elderly population (65 years and older) projected to continue. The proportion of people aged over 65 is forecast to rise from an estimated 22.7% in 2021 to 24.4% in 2026. Population ageing will prove to be a burden on already heavily indebted social services, particularly the pension and healthcare systems.

Greece--highlights: Market opportunities   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 215.8 212.9 232.0 250.7 268.4 283.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 20,806 20,639 22,603 24,556 26,429 28,070
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 209.4 207.4 224.9 244.9 262.4 276.6
Household consumption (US$ bn) 149.6 147.9 159.2 172.6 184.2 194.1
Household consumption per head (US$) 14,420 14,330 15,520 16,910 18,140 19,210

- During the pandemic GDP per head (at market exchange rates) slumped to an estimated US$18,116 in 2020-well below the EU average. This is forecast to rise to US$28,070 by 2026. This primarily reflects a projected recovery in GDP, from a low base, following the coronavirus crisis, but also a shrinking population. The after-effects of the coronavirus crisis in 2020-21 will continue to reshape market opportunities, which had already changed considerably during the sovereign debt crisis. The recovery of the tourism industry (and associated real estate) sector, should revive market opportunities. A return to the rapid pre-crisis increases in one-person households is unlikely over the medium term.

Greece--highlights: Long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 3.1 2.2 2.5
Growth of real GDP 2.6 1.7 2.0
Labour productivity growth 2.4 2.9 2.7

- We expect real GDP to grow at 2.6% per year on average in 2022-30 (3.1% per head). Over 2031-50 average annual GDP growth is forecast to be 1.7% (2.2% per head). Labour productivity growth is expected to average 2.7% per year over the entire long-term forecast period. But the working-age population and labour force will shrink. We believe that the risk that Greece will leave the euro area will increase over the long term.

Fact sheet Annual data 2021 a Historical averages (%) 2017-21
Population (m) 10.4 Population growth -0.5
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 215.8 b Real GDP growth 0.6
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 338.6 b Real domestic demand growth 1.4
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 20,806 Inflation 0.3
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 32,646 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.8
Exchange rate (av) €:US$ 0.8 b FDI inflows (% of GDP) 2.1
a EIU estimates. b Actual.
Background: After 400 years of Ottoman rule, Greece emerged as a sovereign state in 1830. A devastating civil war followed the retreat of German occupying forces in 1944. A military junta ruled the country from 1967 to 1974, but since then a democracy has been in place. In 1981 Greece joined the European Economic Community, now the EU. It became a member of the economic and monetary union (EMU) in 2001, but its public finances became unsustainable, resulting in a sovereign-debt crisis in 2009-10. Greece's elevated public debt put the country's EMU membership into question, but that risk has receded.
Political structure: Greece is a parliamentary republic, with deputies elected for four-year terms. The prime minister and government hold executive powers. The president is elected by the 300-member parliament for a five-year term. The government requires the support of parliament to hold office. The 2010 crisis shook the traditional party system. Voters blamed the parties that ruled Greece after its return to democracy in the mid-1970s-namely New Democracy (ND) and the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok)-for causing the crisis, which led to the imposition of painful austerity by the country's external creditors. The result has been political fragmentation and the rise of populist parties such as the left-wing Syriza Coalition of the Radical Left (Syriza), which was in power in 2015-19, and far-right parties such as the neo-fascist Golden Dawn (XA), but in July 2019 ND returned to power and XA failed to win enough votes to enter parliament.
Policy issues: Greece exited its third economic-adjustment programme in August 2018, but will be subject to monitoring by its euro zone creditors for decades. The covid-related public-health crisis led to agreed fiscal targets and some structural reforms being put on hold. In the short term the government's main focus will be implementing its reform programme to maximise the use of grants and loans under the EU recovery fund, and responding to the economic challenges created by the war in Ukraine. In the medium to long term the main challenges will be putting Greece's public finances on a sustainable footing, diversifying economic activity to reduce overdependence on tourism, improving the business environment, reviving the privatisation programme and reducing Greek banks' still-high levels of non-performing loans.
Taxation: The tax rate is 22% on corporate profits and 5% on distributed dividends. The top personal income-tax rate is 45%. The standard value-added tax (VAT) rate is 24%, but temporary cuts and payment deferrals have applied during the pandemic.
Foreign trade: In 2021 goods exports (fob) were worth about US$46.3bn and imports (fob) amounted to US$76.6bn. The current account registered a deficit of US$12.7bn, equivalent to 5.9% of GDP.
Major exports 2021 % of total Major imports 2021 % of total
Mineral fuels, lubricants & related materials 28.2 Mineral fuels, lubricants & related materials 26.5
Food, drinks & tobacco 17.1 Machinery & transport equipment 19.3
Chemicals & related products 14.2 Chemicals & related products 17.1
Machinery & transport equipment 9.7 Food, drinks & tobacco 11.1
       
Leading markets 2021 % of total Leading suppliers 2021 % of total
Italy 9.9 Germany 11.1
Germany 7.3 Iraq 8.7
Turkey 6.4 Russia 7.8
Cyprus 5.1 Italy 6.7
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance Following the July 2019 general election, the centre-right New Democracy (ND) party, led by Kyriakos Mitsotakis, was returned to office with a majority of 158 seats in the 300-seat parliament. The ND government replaced a coalition comprising the dominant left-wing Syriza Coalition of the Radical Left-Progressive Alliance (Syriza), led by Alexis Tsipras, and the smaller, hardline nationalist Independent Greeks (ANEL). Several parties represented in the previous parliament either did not stand, notably the centre-left To Potami (The River), or failed to reach the 3% vote threshold for parliamentary representation, such as the neo-fascist Golden Dawn (XA). In October 2020, after a trial that had lasted five and a half years, an Athens court sentenced 57 leaders, members and associates of XA to a total of more than 500 years in prison on charges ranging from murder and assault to running or participating in a criminal organisation. According to opinion polls in mid-2022, both ND and Syriza have lost ground since the 2019 election, falling below 40% and 30% support respectively. The centre-left alliance Movement for Change (KINAL), which was formed in 2018, has made strong gains, almost doubling its support compared with 2019, as has the ultranationalist party, Greek Solution (EL).

July 7th 2019 legislative election
Party Share of the vote (%) Seats
New Democracy (ND) 39.9 158
Syriza Coalition of the Radical Left-Progressive Alliance 31.5 86
Movement for Change (KINAL) a 8.1 22
Communist Party of Greece (KKE) 5.3 15
Greek Solution (EL) 3.7 10
MeRA 25 b 3.4 9
Total, incl others c 100.0 300
a Formed by the Panhellenic Socialist Movement, Pasok, and other small centre-left parties. b  European Realistic Disobedience Front 2025, the Greek affiliate of the Democracy in Europe Movement 2025 (DeEM25). c Parties that poll below 3% are not represented in parliament.
Source: The Economist Intelligence Unit.
Political outlook: Political stability The centre-right New Democracy (ND) administration, led by the prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, is in the final year of its four-year mandate. It continues to enjoy relatively solid public support and positive relations with Greece's euro zone creditors, owing to its efforts to implement agreed reforms amid the challenges posed by the coronavirus pandemic since March 2020. The government is the first single-party executive since the start of the Greek crisis, more than a decade ago. Although it has just 157 seats in the 300-seat parliament, the party has remained fairly united under Mr Mitsotakis's leadership, whereas the opposition is fragmented and ineffectual. However, the task of governing has become more challenging in the second half of its term. Besides the need to address the legacy issues of Greece's sovereign-debt crisis, the government has had to respond to the negative economic impact of the pandemic and of the war in Ukraine.
EIU expects the ND government to continue to focus on implementing its reform programme to maximise the use of grants and loans under the EU recovery fund. However, reforms will face strong resistance as the economic outlook darkens, making implementation difficult, especially in areas such as the labour market, social security and the judicial system. We expect the unemployment rate, which had declined to 12.6% in the first quarter of 2022, to start to rise again as pandemic support is withdrawn. This, combined with surging energy prices hitting households and small businesses, will fuel protests-potentially resulting in social unrest-and erode ND's popular support ahead of the mid-2023 general election.
Compounding the government's challenges, another resurgence of the pandemic in late 2022 cannot be ruled out. The wave of infections caused by the Delta and Omicron coronavirus variants in 2021 proved difficult to contain and led to the introduction of unpopular restrictions on those who had not been fully vaccinated, including fines for those aged 60 and over.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness Greece scores poorly in relation to other developed economies on political and institutional effectiveness, as a result of the high levels of corruption, patronage and inefficiency affecting the government and the legal system. However, we expect a gradual improvement during the forecast period, driven by reforms carried out since the 2019 general election. Under the terms of Greece's financial assistance package, which expired in August 2018, the authorities committed to implementing a far-reaching reform of the public administration, judiciary and society more broadly. However, political effectiveness was sorely lacking since the start of the bail-out era in 2010, reflecting weak governments and an inefficient bureaucracy. Despite a range of fiscal and structural reforms having been legislated, implementation of bail-out and post-bail out policies fell short in the face of political and societal resistance. The ND government has provided some momentum to the reform process, enacting several reforms intended to improve government effectiveness, including one containing measures to address major shortcomings in public administration. The outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic in March 2020 disrupted the reform process in many areas, causing delays to the adoption of agreed legislation, as well as the implementation of reforms. But as the public health crisis has eased and EU recovery funds have become available, the pace of reform has picked up again. Nevertheless, reform plans to improve efficiency in the civil service will continue to face resistance from political groups and trade unions.
Reform momentum has recovered as the public health crisis has eased The establishment of a modern state and public administration has been one of the four pillars of the reform agenda under the bail-out programme and the post-bail-out enhanced surveillance regime overseen by Greece's euro zone creditors. The main priorities have been to control the size and cost of the public sector and at the same time increase the efficiency of the public administration in the delivery of essential public goods and services. Reforms have been designed aimed at strengthening the institutional and operational independence of major institutions, such as revenue administration and the Hellenic Statistical Authority (ELSTAT, the national statistics office), as well as improving the efficiency of the judicial system and tackling corruption.
Action to strengthen the public sector recruitment system is continuing During most of the 2010-18 period the government adhered to an attrition rule of one new entry for every three exits; this was adjusted to 1:1 in 2019-22, with unfilled positions from the previous period carried over into 2020, in addition to allowing the conversion of temporary posts into permanent positions. However, in order to increase its control over the hiring of temporary staff, the ND government has reduced the number of exceptions used to bypass temporary staff hiring procedures. At the same time, the government is taking action to strengthen the efficiency of the civil service recruitment system and reduce political interference, by increasing the capacity of the Supreme Council for Civil Personnel Selection (ASEP), the authority responsible for civil service recruitment, by end-2022. The measures include stronger competition procedures, scoring classification procedures, temporary staff hiring procedures and the reorganisation of the Council. However, given past trends and a likely rise in unemployment as a result of the pandemic when government support measures are gradually withdrawn, a return in the future to pre-crisis practices of excessive levels of public-sector hiring and political interference cannot be ruled out.
The European Commission's quarterly enhanced surveillance reviews have highlighted that there has been uneven progress in areas such as depoliticisation of the public administration. This was supposed to be accomplished through renewal of the top management and the implementation of new selection procedures for all levels of senior management, including the replacement of political appointees. The Commission has also noted mixed progress in efforts to increase the efficiency of the judicial system, which is needed to enhance the business environment and revive investment. Greece's judicial system remains burdened by an excessive backlog of cases, especially tax cases (appealing tax decisions can take up to 12 years). The sector is subject to frequent strikes by the courts and the Bar Association.
In terms of the anti-corruption agenda, the implementation of the relevant action plan is proceeding, and according to the May 2022 enhanced surveillance report, the European Commission noted that the Greek authorities had noted improvements, including the adoption of "significant measures" to implement the recommendations of the Group of States against Corruption (GRECO). These include the reversal of the ND government's decision in 2019 to downgrade the criminal offence of bribery of public officials from a felony to a misdemeanour. The authorities have repeatedly amended the legal framework for the financing of political parties to bring it into line with European best practice.
Overall, progress in modernising the public administration and tackling ingrained patronage and corruption is likely to be gradual, at best. We expect Greece to continue to lag behind most of its peers in the EU in this area and there is a risk that over the medium term reforms could be rolled back or, more likely, diluted. However, the need to improve government effectiveness to meet the governance requirements for access to EU recovery funds could spur a more rapid improvement than we are currently expecting.
Political outlook: Election watch The next general election is due in mid-2023, when Greece will also hold local and regional polls. We expect the ND government to remain in office until the end of its four-year term. In January 2020 parliament passed a law that restored the 50-seat bonus for the party that wins the most votes in a general election, which the previous administration had abolished. However, with 163 votes in favour, the restoration of the 50-seat bonus will take effect only at the general election after the next one. This will complicate government formation after the next election, as it will be difficult to form a single-party majority government. We believe that a snap election within 12 months of the 2023 election is likely. The next presidential election by parliament is due in January 2025.
Political outlook: International relations In recent years Greece has strengthened its commitment to Euro-Atlantic organisations. The US sees Greece as a linchpin of stability in the Balkans, Black Sea and eastern Mediterranean regions, and the two countries will continue to develop a strategic partnership encompassing energy and security. Greece has strongly supported the EU response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which has been closely co-ordinated with the US and other Western allies, and involves the imposition of far-reaching sanctions. Europe's leaders have so far eschewed measures to restrict Russia's gas exports, fearing that this would send EU economies into recession. The most significant risk is a cut-off in gas imports from Russia, either as a result of new EU sanctions or Russian action. Russia has halted direct gas deliveries to eight countries so far, after they refused to accept the new terms for payment, prompting a spike in gas prices as concerns rose about cut-offs to other countries. The EU is in the process of reducing its reliance on Russian energy, which will cause significant changes to the bloc's energy mix and infrastructure over the medium term. At the end of May the EU agreed on a partial ban on imports of oil from Russia.
Tensions between Greece and Turkey will remain high, notably over long-standing territorial disputes in the Aegean Sea and hydrocarbons exploration in the eastern Mediterranean. Other sources of tension have been the refugee crisis in Turkey (stemming from the conflict in Syria), which exposes Greece to waves of migrants seeking to enter the EU. Both countries are members of NATO, which will mitigate the chance of tensions escalating into military hostilities. However, elections are due to be held in both countries in 2023, which has already caused tensions to flare up again.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
Overall position 5.78 7.06 53 33 18 14
Political environment 5.7 6.7 43 35 17 15
 Political stability 6.6 7.4 44 27 17 14
 Political effectiveness 4.9 6.1 43 38 16 15
Macroeconomic environment 5.5 6.3 67 55 17 16
Market opportunities 4.6 6.5 55 28 18 13
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 6.0 7.3 39 23 15 13
Policy towards foreign investment 5.1 6.9 66 35 18 15
Foreign trade & exchange controls 6.9 9.6 55 4 18 1
Taxes 5.1 6.2 68 49 17 11
Financing 5.9 7.4 46 27 18 13
The labour market 5.9 6.4 51 41 16 14
Infrastructure 6.5 7.5 35 26 16 13
Technological readiness 6.6 6.9 39 42 16 15
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Economic reforms introduced since the height of the Greek fiscal crisis in 2010, and the election in July 2019 of a pro-business, centre-right government, have improved the outlook for the business environment in Greece. Owing to progress in several categories, EIU's overall business environment score for Greece rises from 5.78 in the historical period (2017-21) to 7.06 in the forecast period (2022-26), pushing up its global ranking by 20 places, to 33rd. However, Greece remains near the bottom of the regional ranking, at 14th. Because of Greece's heavy reliance on tourism, the economy was especially hard hit by the coronavirus pandemic. The recovery under way has proved resilient but will be constrained by the rise in energy costs and inflationary pressures that have become ubiquitous since the Russian invasion of Ukraine in March 2022.
Public administration reforms could make a big difference to business The biggest improvements are in policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, market opportunities and financing. These improvements reflect the potential impact of the overhaul of the public administration introduced by the New Democracy (ND) government in 2019 and a new momentum in digitalisation; a swift realignment from support- to recovery-related pandemic-driven funding; reforms in the banking system to reduce Greek banks' still-high level of non-performing loans; and efforts to attract foreign investment.
The economy will remain under a monitoring regime, but Greece's creditors have adopted a more positive attitude towards the country's economic prospects. This reflects the ND government's pro-business legislative agenda and its handling of the pandemic, but addressing Greece's entrenched structural problems will be challenging. There remains a risk over the medium term that reforms could be rolled back or, more likely, diluted.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Greece's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: The pro-business New Democracy (ND) government steps up efforts to revive its privatisation programme. A newly created "project readiness" unit starts to deliver, with a focus on low-hanging fruit.
2024-26: Efforts to valorise public property through concession management and long-leasehold development agreements.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Cutting bureaucracy will be a focus; with this aim, the Investment Incentives Law of 2016 was supplemented by new legislation in October 2019. A series of international investments starts to take shape.
2024-26: The 2019 "Fast-track" legislation could help to drive an investment recovery in "strategic" sectors such as energy, tourism, transport, communications and health. A further boost could come from EU recovery fund-related reforms
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: Remaining capital controls were lifted in September 2019, but the disruption in international travel and trade caused by the spread of the coronavirus has held Greece back. A recovery, albeit brittle, starts to take shape.
2024-26: The risk of Greece leaving the euro zone is subsiding further.
Taxes 2022-23: Extensive efforts to widen the tax base while lowering rates. The government pledges to pursue aggressive tax collection, but implementation is difficult. Efforts to simplify both tax structure and tax filings under way.
2024-26: Slow progress in cutting corporate tax and value-added tax rates. Measures to tackle tax evasion are stepped up.
Financing 2022-23: Pressure to reduce non-performing loans (NPLs) intensifies, but foreign interest picks up. A moratorium on foreclosures is lifted for the majority of debtors. Liquidity is likely to remain tight as European monetary policy changes course.
2024-26: The need to reduce continued high NPLs hampers lending. More Greek bank foreign subsidiaries are sold off.
The labour market 2022-23: Unemployment is at its lowest since the start of Greece's sovereign debt crisis more than a decade ago, yet still high by international standards. Some sectors, including tourism, are reporting shortages.
2024-26: EU-funded job-creation schemes, particularly for youth, raise employment but create few productive jobs.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Energy infrastructure comes to the fore following the opening of the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline (TAP) in January 2021 and a floating storage and regasification unit in 2022. The ongoing war accentuates the importance of these investments.
2024-26: Technical assistance from the EU helps absorption of European funds to revive infrastructure investment.
Technological readiness 2022-23: Greece rolls out high-speed internet, at a slow pace. Private-sector adoption of electronic payments widens. Digitalisation of the public administration, accelerated by the coronavirus pandemic, has gained societal traction. It is one of the pillars of future reform.
2024-26: Significant financial and technical assistance from the EU, but Greece remains a laggard.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.5 6.3 67 55 17 16
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
"Grexit" is no longer a risk in the medium term Greece's score for the macroeconomic environment is relatively low but improves marginally in the forecast period, as the economy presents a mixed picture after the country's exit from the third economic adjustment programme in August 2018. The unemployment rate is no longer the highest in the euro zone (12.2% in March 2022, seasonally adjusted), owing partly to the government's support measures to stave off bankruptcies during the pandemic. Households are highly indebted but debtors' primary residences have long been protected from foreclosure. This protection was set to expire in 2020 but was extended during the pandemic. The insolvency framework has been modernised but a mixture of payment moratoria and court adjournments owing to the pandemic has rendered it-for now-ineffective. The banking system is burdened with bad loans, although a workout including state guarantees for securitisation is under way. At the same time, the stock of public debt remains the highest in the euro zone (as a share of GDP) at 193.8%; the public sector is still inefficient, despite gradual reforms; and labour market and demographic trends are not conducive to growth.

- The primary budget surplus targets, which are equivalent to 3.5% of GDP annually in 2019-22, declining to 2.2% from 2023, were waived again in 2022, with a return to fiscal adjustment expected from 2023. This allowed the government to put into place hefty support packages consisting of deferring tax payments, moratoria on foreclosures and outright subsidies. Greece's creditors have praised the government's efforts to keep reform implementation on track. Financial markets have also been more positive about Greek sovereign debt, despite its size. Another debt write-down is unlikely, given that most of it is owed to Greece's official creditors. "Grexit" is not a risk in the medium term: Greece has a large cash buffer and manageable short-term repayment schedule.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.0 7.3 39 23 15 13
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Efforts to promote competition are under way, but face headwinds Progress towards liberalisation, enhancing competition and privatising state-owned companies was uneven, largely because of weak implementation. The coronavirus pandemic in 2020 disrupted efforts to get reforms back on track, but we expect some improvement during the forecast period. State asset sales brought in only EUR2.9bn in 2011-15 and cash receipts amounted to just one-fifth of the envisaged EUR2.5bn in 2016. The process picked up pace in 2017 to reach EUR1.4bn in sales, but as reform momentum waned only EUR1bn was raised in 2018. Of the EUR1.2bn raised in 2019, EUR1.1bn came from a single deal-the extension of the concession agreement for the Athens International Airport.

- The centre-right government that took office following the 2019 election made privatisation a policy priority, but the onset of the coronavirus pandemic in early 2020 set this process back. Privatisation revenues amounted to a mere EUR54m in 2020, against a target of EUR2.4bn. The government set a target of EUR1.8bn for 2021, of which it achieved about one-third. The 2022 target of EUR2.2bn also seems ambitious.

Privatisation plans are moving ahead after disruption during the pandemic
- Initial delays in launching the Hellenic Corporation of Assets and Participations (EESYP)-Greece's privatisation and investment fund, of which the Hellenic Republic Asset Development Fund (TAIPED) is now a subsidiary-have been overcome. Under its strategic plan for the development, restructuring and sale of its assets, EESYP is working to improve corporate governance at the companies it manages. The profits will be used to pay down public debt and boost investment in the economy, but implementation is likely to be protracted.
- In August 2021 a concession to operate the Egnatia highway was awarded to a local construction firm, GEK Terna, and Egis of France. The sale of shares in two regional ports (Alexandroupolis and Igoumenitsa) and a subconcession of a terminal for the Kavala port received strong investor interest in 2020; a fourth port, in Heraklion, was added in 2021. The sale for the development of Hellinikon, the site of the former international airport, is progressing; a casino licence, which was a prerequisite, has now been awarded and the breakdown of development land and assets that will remain public property has been agreed. Shares were transferred in June 2021.
- The long-delayed sale of a 66% stake in the Hellenic Gas Transmission System Operator (DESFA, which is 31% owned by TAIPED and 35% by Hellenic Petroleum, HELPE) to an international consortium comprising Snam (an Italian infrastructure company; 60%), Enagás (a Spanish energy company; 20%) and Fluxys (a Belgian natural gas transmission operator; 20%) was completed at the end of 2018. The conclusion of the DESFA process unlocked the process for the privatisation of the commercial division of the Public Gas Corporation (DEPA) and HELPE. In a tender for the state's stake in HELPE no bids materialised. DEPA has been split into DEPA Infrastructure and DEPA Retail, and ITALGAS of Italy acquired DEPA Infrastructure for EUR733m in September 2021.
- Laws put in place in 2011 and 2012 abolished restrictive practices in more than 150 professions, but they have not been fully applied. Implementation of the law has in many cases been left to professional groups, which have used their influence to maintain restrictive practices. Legislation has been passed to open network industries, but it is ponderous, and implementation will be slow.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.1 6.9 66 35 18 15
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Attracting foreign direct investment is high on the ND government's agenda The ND government has adopted a foreign direct investment (FDI) policy aimed at reversing a process of disinvestment that has been going on since 2010. Although we expect some reforms to be implemented during the forecast period, improving Greece's attractiveness as a location for FDI will be challenging. Persistent deterrents include complex and unevenly enforced legislation, frequent changes in tax laws and obstructive and whimsical bureaucracy. ΤThe government is scaling up efforts to mitigate these through the digitisation of procedures, funded in part through the EU's post-pandemic Recovery and Resilience plan.

- The third Economic Adjustment Programme (EAP) in 2015-18 included policies to speed up company registration, "fast-track" investment (by facilitating approvals and relaxing regulation) and simplify export rules. The fast-track legislation covers investments that are deemed to be strategic. Priorities include industry, energy, tourism, transport, communication, health and waste management. The fast-track process provides for approval in one month by the Interministerial Committee for Strategic Investments (DESE) and facilitation of licensing and permitting applications (against payment of fees) within two months by the Ministry of Development's Enterprise Greece agency. The process did not start out smoothly. By February 2020, before the outbreak of the coronavirus, only 15 investments had been approved, according to the agency's website. A combination of the ND government's pro-business attitude and growing investor appetite resulted in this rising to 45 by May 2022.

Investors will be offered more tax breaks and fewer cash subsidies
- The investment incentives law (which provides for tax breaks and grants to promote regional development) involves the National Fund for Entrepreneurship and Development (ETEAN), which has now been recast as the Hellenic Development Bank (HDB). HDB operates in conjunction with commercial banks to provide financing for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). However, given Greek banks' high levels of non-performing loans (NPLs) and the difficulty facing banks in foreclosure cases, available funding is limited. HDB is supplemented by the Development Ministry with EU-led community support framework funding, as well as by Information Society, the government's technological consultancy arm. The result has often been confusing for SMEs, which have to invest a substantial amount of time in chasing up funding.
- In October 2019 the ND government passed Law 4635/2019 aimed at alleviating some of the bureaucratic burden generally, and specifically in more targeted sectors (for example, by simplifying the licensing of fifth-generation-5G-mobile telephony antennas). Some of the highlights include speeding up litigation via the introduction of an electronic filing system, the introduction of private-sector auditors for the evaluation of investment plans and curtailing administrative delays in land use approval, for example those determined by the archaeological agency. In December 2020 5G licences were awarded for EUR372m. In February 2021 the government also mended fences with Eldorado Gold, by signing an amended agreement covering many of the disputes that led to several lawsuits, which the government lost. Important investments were also announced in 2020 by Microsoft and Pfizer among others. Early in 2022 the acquisition of a minority stake in a Greek fintech start-up, Viva Wallet, by JP Morgan set a new record with a US$2bn valuation. This was followed by a (smaller) acquisition of an audio software group, Accusonos, by Facebook's parent, Meta.
- In April 2013 an "investor ombudsman" service was set up to examine deadlocked investments and liaise with the relevant branch(es) of the public administration to remove stumbling blocks. The ombudsman, which is part of Enterprise Greece, is available for investments in excess of EUR2m. Enterprise Greece also runs a "golden visa" programme, which grants investors residence permits when investing in the country. Close to 10,000 of these had been granted at the end of January 2022, some 600 of which to Russian nationals. Following the invasion of Ukraine and the ensuing EU sanctions, Russian applications have been put on hold, and the EU has called for a common European framework for such schemes, especially as regards background vetting.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.9 9.6 55 4 18 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Greece's foreign trade and exchange regime has improved In September 2019 the newly elected ND government abolished the remaining exchange and capital controls that had been put in place in June 2015 to prevent a mass withdrawal of cash from the banking system at the height of the debt crisis. The restrictions contravened the rules of the common currency, but the European Commission deemed them justifiable to maintain the stability of the Greek financial system. Their abolition is one of the main factors behind the significant score improvement for Greece in this category in 2022-26.

- As long as Greece remains a member of the EU (and the euro area), which we consider most likely, the country's foreign trade and exchange policy will be that of the EU. The EU remains committed to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and its dispute arbitration procedures, despite an appointment crisis at the WTO's Appellate Body since late 2019, which undermined their effectiveness. Despite the change of administration in the US in 2021, efforts to resolve the crisis have so far failed. Greece has so far been largely unaffected (directly) by the global pick-up in tariffs in recent years.
- Within the EU no tariffs or quotas are permitted, and the bloc has abolished most other non-tariff trade restrictions, such as health regulation that favours domestically produced goods. The EU has a customs union with Turkey; includes Norway and Iceland in the European Economic Area; and has a range of bilateral agreements enabling free trade and other economic exchange with Switzerland. Agriculture is excluded from all of these arrangements. Outside agriculture, trade with non-EU countries is mostly subject to moderate customs duties. The EU takes a liberal approach to trade in industrial goods. Average unweighted tariffs on these goods from "most-favoured nations" are 4%.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.1 6.2 68 49 17 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Efforts to reduce tax evasion will remain a government priority Improvement of tax collection is a major policy focus aimed at reducing widespread tax evasion and avoidance to increase tax revenue and widen the tax base so that high tax rates can be reduced. Some progress has been made since 2015, but tax increases since the start of the crisis in 2010 have played a role in generating higher levels of government revenue. The ND government, seeking to reverse the upward trend, enacted a series of consecutive corporate and real estate tax cuts. Plans to widen the base for property tax by aligning property tax values with market prices have been scaled down considerably as market prices adjusted downwards during the covid crisis.

- The overhaul of the tax administration has been painfully slow. The Independent Authority for Public Revenue (IAPR) became operational only in 2017 as an autonomous agency, following a series of ineffective reforms. However, with significant technical support from the Commission and the IMF, the IAPR has begun to shift from building its institutional capacity to enhancing its operational capacity and efficiency by adopting modern collection and audit tools, as well as increasing staffing levels. A new salary grid aimed at attracting high-calibre staff was passed in February 2021. Tax collection rose marginally (by 0.3%) in 2019, despite a reduction in rates, but in 2020 and 2021 the government adopted a series of deferrals, waivers and other measures to try to prevent business failures. More widespread use of electronic payments due to the pandemic may also have contributed to curbing tax evasion.

Some tax cuts are under way, but high public debt will limit room for more
- Some tax cuts have been adopted since 2018. But given the size of the public debt, the overall tax burden is unlikely to be reduced substantially during the forecast period. The corporate income tax (CIT) rate is one of the highest in the EU, at 22% in 2021 (down from 28% in 2019). The system is complex, adding to the administrative burden of compliance, and the burden of taxation on labour remains higher than the EU average.
- Under the monitoring regime of Greece's EU creditors, further reform of the tax administration will remain a priority. Efforts to improve the efficiency of the justice system have had mixed results, which suggests that progress towards reducing the backlog of tax appeal cases is also likely to be slow. Debt management units are being establised in all larger tax offices to concentrate on tax arrears that can be paid through the negotiation of instalment plans. All tax obligations must be settled through bank transfers coupled with tax identification measures; the use of cheques and cash has been abolished to reduce the scope for corruption of inspectors.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.9 7.4 46 27 18 13
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Banking sector is focused on NPL reduction Greek banks went through a difficult time in 2010-14, and 2015 was even worse, culminating in a month-long bank holiday from June 28th and the imposition of capital controls, following accelerating capital flight. In 2012 rising NPLs and the 53.5% haircut on private-sector sovereign debt holdings (a 79% reduction in net present value) resulted in state-funded recapitalisation, followed by a new round of capital increases in 2014, which were privately funded. The stakes in the systemic banks of the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund (HFSF), which is also a subsidiary of EESYP, were as follows in early 2022: Eurobank Egrasias, 1.40%; National Bank of Greece, 40.39%; Alpha Bank, 9%; and Piraeus Bank, 27%.

- In May 2018 the European Central Bank (ECB), the euro zone's banking watchdog, released the stress test results for the four "systemic" Greek banks. There were no official "pass rates", but unofficially a capitalisation rate of 5.5% or better under an adverse growth scenario is considered acceptable. All of the Greek banks met this benchmark, but they did not do so by a large margin owing mainly to the large NPL burden that continues to weigh on the Greek banking system. According to data from the Bank of Greece (the central bank), NPLs accounted for 12.1% of total loans in December 2021, down from a high of 49.2% in mid-2017. A government project named Hercules, under which banks shift loans to special purpose vehicles (SPVs) and issue tranches of debt on them with the government guaranteeing (against fair remuneration) the senior tranche, has helped to speed the process. New problem loans are likely to surface, however, once the coronavirus crisis abates, and the government passed, in July 2021, a second tranche of Hercules to that effect. Stress tests by the European authorities conducted in 2021 did not include Greek banks.
- Domestic deposits at Greek banks remain well below pre-crisis levels after falling by 30% in 2009-12 and by another 25% in the first half of 2015. After stabilising as a result of capital controls in 2015-17, they began to increase gradually again towards the end of 2017. The pace picked up after the 2019 election and the abolition of capital controls, returning deposits in March 2022 approximately back to their 2011 levels.
- Bank credit contracted for 36 consecutive quarters to March 2020 but stabilised briefly during the pandemic as a result of government support for businesses, before starting to fall again as lockdowns eased and support was gradually scaled back. We expect lending to the private sector to be constrained under the weight of NPLs during most of the forecast period. Despite the Hercules plan, progress is constrained by weak bank profitability, moratoria on repossessions and a likely new bout of bad loans. A new insolvency framework, which took effect in January 2021, is intended to address many of the issues that have hindered banks' ability to clean up their balance sheets.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.9 6.4 51 41 16 14
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Labour market is gradually becoming more flexible, but progress is slow Greece's labour market has been one of the least flexible in the euro area. However, this began to change in 2010. In addition to greater flexibility regarding redundancies and a reduction of redundancy compensation, reforms should enable company-level collective agreements to prevail over those at the sectoral and occupational levels. Another law provided for flexible working time, including part-time shift work. The government, under pressure from creditors to liberalise the market and after losing a precedent-setting case at the European Court of Justice, abolished in May 2017 the discretionary right of the labour minister to approve collective dismissals in the private sector. Two further pieces of legislation enacted in June and September 2021 include provisions to limit the scope for industrial action, more flexibility in working hours and a capitalisation social security pillar (Greece's state-run system is solely redistributive).
Unemployment is likely to rise again as government withdraws support
- Labour market liberalisation and economic recovery, as well as emigration of mainly young Greeks and government support during the coronavirus pandemic, has helped to reduce the unemployment rate, which was 12.2% in March 2022, down from a peak of 27.9% in July 2013 during the sovereign debt crisis. Government measures prevented a sharp rise in unemployment during the coronavirus pandemic-induced lockdowns, but we expect job losses to rise as support measures are gradually withdrawn.
- The rise of unemployment during the sovereign debt crisis was accompanied by sharp wage cuts, which were reduced three times in the public sector in 2010-12. In 2012 the government slashed the minimum wage for over-25-year-olds by 22% and by 32% for under 25s. The minimum wage remained unchanged until February 2019, when a single rate was restored and increased by 10.9% to EUR650 per month (still 14 annual payments). This was increased twice in 2022, first by 2% in January, and then by an additional 7.7% in May, as a response to inflationary pressures. The minimum wage stood, as a result, at EUR713.

Statutory pension age has increased, and is likely to rise further
- Primary (pillar one) pensions in the public and private sectors were reformed in 2011. In 2015 new legislation introduced penalties for early retirement in an attempt to address loopholes that let people collect pension benefits at an average age of 57-58. In May 2016 a new way of calculating pensions was introduced. It reduced auxiliary pensions, partially stopped the payment of a special social solidarity allowance for low-income pensioners (EKAS), cut high-end pensions and widower pensions, and increased insurance contributions for employers, employees and farmers. Starting in 2017, contributions were further increased for freelancers and civil servants. The private sector is now almost exclusively served by a single fund that came about from the merger of eight smaller ones in 2017. The statutory pension age is 67, and the number of years of contributions necessary to secure a full pension is 40. The minimum pension eligibility age is 62. In 2020 further reforms gave the self-employed greater flexibility in their choice of pension plan and digitised parts of the social security process.
- From 2021 the statutory pension age and the minimum pension eligibility ages, of 67 and 62, will be revised every three years, in line with life expectancy. In the future pensions will be based on full earnings history, and accrual rates will be reduced so that the replacement ratio will drop from about 80% to 64%.
- Future Greek governments may regret the decision (approved by the Commission) not to include previously agreed pension cuts in the 2019 budget, because they were deemed unnecessary to meet the government's primary budget surplus target of 3.5% of GDP. The cuts were designed to reduce the difference between the higher pension levels of those drawing their pensions before the 2016 reform and those drawing them after. With budget targets on hold, the issue is not likely to come to the fore before 2023 at the earliest.
- According to the OECD's Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2018 test scores (latest available data), 31% of Greek 15-year-olds were "low achievers" in reading and 36% in mathematics, compared with OECD averages of 23% and 24% respectively. A series of reforms have been passed on the education front, covering vocational training (December 2020), higher education (February 2021) and primary and secondary education (August 2021). ΤThe Commission's 13th enhanced surveillance review called for further reform of higher education, a draft for which was presented in late March 2022. Persistently high youth unemployment has led more than 400,000 young educated Greeks to seek work abroad. With a labour force of about 4.7m, the negative effect on Greece's labour market is such as to mobilise the government to attempt to design policies to reverse the trend. These have, however, so far focused mostly on temporary tax reprieves for those returning and thus are neither alleviating the underlying structural deficiencies nor having much traction.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.5 7.5 35 26 16 13
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Major deficiencies in infrastructure will remain The poor quality of Greece's transport and communications networks is holding back the country's international trade and investment potential. Delays to plans to improve infrastructure arise for a variety of reasons, including scarcity of funds, despite the availability of EU monies; administrative complexity; and political opposition at local and national level. The main gaps include the need to upgrade the existing rail network; improve interconnections between domestic and international transport links; overhaul the coastal shipping network to improve the accessibility of islands and reduce overreliance on the port of Piraeus; and promote multi-modal freight transport by improving rail connections to Trans-European Transport Network ports such as Thessaloniki. Because of a lack of investment, Greece has lagged well behind most of the rest of the EU in the move to fast broadband in terms of both the availability of higher speeds and coverage.

- A motorway (Pathe) runs between Athens, the capital, and Thessaloniki, on the east coast of the mainland, and a highway-standard link (Egnatia) runs across the north from the port of Igoumenitsa to the Turkish border. However, nine uplinks from Egnatia to the Balkans remain uncompleted. The tendering of a long-term concession for Egnatia and three of its uplinks received repeated extensions until it was awarded in August 2021 to a local construction firm, GEK Terna, and Egis of France.
- The government created a special purpose vehicle (SVP) called Hellenic Motorways, where the state allocated its concession rights from five concession toll roads contracted by the government in the early 2000s. As the economic downturn stalled projects, the government renegotiated the concession contracts in 2013, with the Commission approving related funding of EUR2.97bn. The works were largely concluded in 2017. The central Greece highway's southern portion ran into delays due to structural deficiencies of the adjacent rail network, and an arbitration court decided in 2022 that the government would have to fund the additional cost of either rerouting a 4-km stretch of road or bridging over the railway. This will be in addition to the extra EUR306m approved in October 2018. A northern portion costing EUR442m was agreed in early 2021 and is scheduled to be completed within three years.

ND government has renewed focus on investment
- The government wants to couple management concessions for infrastructure projects such as the railway system, ports and airports with development financing. In August 2016 a Chinese logistics company, Cosco, which in 2010 won a EUR5bn, 35-year concession to manage two of three piers at the main container depot at Piraeus, paid EUR280.5m to acquire a majority stake in the third pier and promised to invest a further EUR350m within the next decade. Of this, EUR294m was supposed to be completed in five years, which would allow Cosco to exercise a right to increase its stake to two-thirds for an additional consideration of EUR88m. Cosco attributed delays in the execution of the investment plan to licensing delays by the state, and requested to exercise the option regardless. The transaction was concluded in October 2021. In March 2018 a 67% stake in the Thessaloniki port authority was sold to a consortium of international and domestic companies for EUR232m upfront plus a portion of revenue annually. The buyers also agreed to undertake investments of EUR180m over the next seven years.
- In April 2017 Germany's Fraport entered a 40-year concession to manage 14 regional airports. It paid EUR1.2bn upfront and will pay both an annual flat fee of EUR23m and a portion of operating profits. It has also undertaken to invest EUR330m in the airports by end-2020. In February 2019 an agreement to extend the concession for Athens International Airport for 20 years (from 2026 onwards) to the current concessionaire was signed for EUR1.4bn. The state subsequently started a tender to sell TAIPED's 30% stake in the airport, but the process stalled during the pandemic.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.6 6.9 39 42 16 15
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Greece scores poorly on technological readiness, which measures how future-oriented the business environment is-the extent to which it is digitally connected, open to innovation and prepared for technological disruption, despite the pro-business ND government's push towards digitalisation.

- Our Inclusive Internet Index ranks Greece 38th out of 100 countries and third to last in the EU. The index ranks countries on four different axes: availability, readiness, affordability and relevance. Greece scores poorly on most fronts, bar relevance. In the EU's Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) Greece ranked 25th out of 27 in 2021. In the UN's E-Government Survey 2020, Greece ranked 42nd out of 193 countries for e-government development-down from 35th in 2018. In the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report 2020, Greece is amongst the least prepared countries to create a vibrant business environment, scoring 47.2 (out of 100) on economic transformation readiness. In the Digital Competitiveness Ranking produced by the International Institute for Management Development (IMD) for 2021, Greece ranked 44th out of 64 countries.
- In 2017 Greece's telecoms regulator approved a two-year roll-out plan for very-high-bit-rate digital subscriber line (VDSL) vectoring technology that will, when completed, considerably improve high-speed internet availability in Greece. However, the plan is facing delays and is being amended on a rolling basis. The government revised its previous targets in June 2021 and now hopes to provide internet access of more than 100 Mbps to at least 70% of households by 2023, up from a target 50% by 2020. Take-up was less than 3% in 2021 but had still tripled in two years, as the pandemic-induced lockdown accentuated the need for strong broadband to cover remote working, education and entertainment needs, and is likely to have spurred action in this area.

Economic forecast: Policy trends The main economic policy challenges facing the government in the medium to long term will be diversifying economic activity to reduce overdependence on tourism, improving competitiveness and putting the public finances on a more sustainable footing. In the short term the government must address risks to the continued recovery of Greece's economy from the slump caused by the pandemic-notably surging international energy prices, which the war in Ukraine has exacerbated-and the possible emergence of new coronavirus variants and another spike in infections in the winter of 2022/23. The EU is taking steps to mitigate the impact of the conflict on EU consumers and businesses. As it did during the covid-19 pandemic, the EU will relax state aid rules to help companies that are facing a sharp increase in input prices. The EU's fiscal rules are also likely to remain suspended for another year, until 2024, to give member states more flexibility as they respond to the crisis.
Greece is eligible for a total of EUR30.5bn (about 18% of GDP) from the EU recovery fund, comprising EUR17.8bn in grants and EUR12.7bn in loans, which is designed to support the member states that have been the worst affected by the pandemic. Added to the EU's multi-annual financial framework, this means that Greece potentially has access to a total of EUR72bn in EU funds in 2021-27. The economic impact of this could be huge, providing an annual boost to real GDP growth of up to 2 percentage points over the medium term. The government's reform plan focuses on the green and digital transformation and measures to boost employment, social cohesion and private investment. Greece received the first pre-financing tranche of funds, worth EUR4bn, in August 2021, and a further EUR3.6bn (EUR1.7bn in grants and EUR1.9bn in loans) in April 2022, having fulfilled the agreed conditions. The release of further funds will depend on the government's ability to maintain the momentum of its reform programme. Greece's business environment suffers from inefficiencies in public administration and the judicial system; a complex tax regime and high social-security contributions; skills mismatches in the labour market, low productivity and restrictive employment laws; and modest levels of investment in research and development. Progress will be watched closely under the post-bail-out monitoring regime conducted by Greece's euro zone creditors, and scrutiny of the implementation of its recovery plan by the EU.
Helping to support investor confidence, the government will continue to maintain a substantial cash buffer (EUR38bn as at mid-April 2022, including EU recovery funds), comprising money raised on international markets and unused loans from official creditors. The reserve would be sufficient to cover the government's financing needs for more than a year, even without further bond issuance. Taking advantage of favourable market conditions, the Public Debt Management Agency (PDMA) raised EUR14bn in medium- and long-term issuance in 2021, and made an early repayment of EUR3.3bn on IMF loans due in 2021-22. The PDMA plans to raise a further EUR12bn through bond issuance in 2022 and at the beginning of April the government completed the early repayment of the remaining EUR1.8bn of its IMF loans. It also plans to pre-pay EUR2.7bn in loans falling due in 2022-23 from the Greek Loan Facility by end-2022.
Financial assistance from the EU recovery fund and support from the European Central Bank (ECB) have helped to contain government borrowing costs in recent years. However, the prospect of monetary policy tightening this year in response to surging inflation has caused upward pressure on Greek government borrowing costs. By early June the secondary-market interest rate on bench-mark ten-year bonds had reached 3.8%, 250 basis points up on end-2021. An increase in risk aversion in global financial markets in response to sharper than expected monetary tightening could cause Greek yields to rise more sharply.
There is also some concern that the withdrawal of pandemic-related support measures will be followed by a rise in banks' heavy burden of non-performing loans (NPLs), which have undermined the stability of the country's credit institutions and impeded lending.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Government expenditure 57.0 56.8 56.3 56.3 55.5 54.5
Government revenue 49.6 52.0 52.6 53.0 53.0 52.7
Budget balance -7.5 -4.9 -3.7 -3.3 -2.5 -1.8
Government debt 193.8 188.4 184.9 182.2 177.7 172.0
Greece's already fragile public finances deteriorated sharply in 2020-21 because of the slump in economic activity in the first year of the pandemic and huge fiscal stimulus over both years. However, provisional government figures point to a better than expected fiscal performance in 2021, with the budget deficit narrowing to 7.5% of GDP, from 10.1% of GDP in 2020, and the public debt/GDP ratio declining to 193.8%, from a peak of 205.7% in 2020. Some pandemic-relief measures have been extended into 2022 and additional support has been introduced to mitigate the impact of surging prices on households and businesses. As a result, the government will not start to tighten fiscal policy until at least 2023, and when it does it will probably do so more gradually than previously assumed because of the increased risks to Greece's economic recovery from the war in Ukraine. Nevertheless, we expect the public finances to improve gradually during the forecast period, owing to moderate economic growth and the disbursement of grants and loans under the EU recovery fund, which began in 2021. EIU forecasts that the budget deficit will narrow to 4.9% of GDP in 2022 and 1.8% of GDP by 2026, with the primary balance returning to surplus from 2024. Economic recovery and narrowing deficits will help to reduce the public debt/GDP ratio, which we expect to fall to 172% by 2026.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Commercial banks' prime rate (av) 4.0 4.2 5.4 5.9 5.9 5.9
Long-term interest rate (av) 0.9 3.2 3.7 3.9 3.9 3.9
Surging inflation is forcing the ECB to begin to unwind its policy stimulus. Inflation across the euro zone reached 7.5% year on year in April, well above the ECB's target of 2%, and will remain elevated well into 2023. Energy costs are the most prominent driver of inflation, but core price pressures are strengthening rapidly, and medium-term inflation expectations are showing signs of becoming unanchored. We expect the ECB to end quantitative easing (QE) at the end of June 2022 and to begin to raise interest rates from July.
Once the ECB begins its tightening cycle, we expect that it will act decisively in front-loading rate increases rather than pursuing a gradual approach. However, the policy outlook is uncertain and subject to several risks. We expect energy prices to remain at their current high levels for the duration of the conflict in Ukraine, and this could provoke a downturn in European manufacturing in the second half of the year, thereby forcing the ECB to slow the pace of monetary tightening. A sudden tightening of financing conditions across the euro zone, particularly in high-debt member states, is another risk that would prompt the ECB to adopt a more cautious stance. Over the past two years, QE has absorbed the bulk of new public debt issuance and has insulated governments from market pressures. These pressures could re-emerge once interest rates begin to rise, and some market repricing of the debt of peripheral euro zone members has already begun.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Economic growth (%)
US GDP 5.7 2.5 1.9 1.7 1.9 1.7
OECD GDP 5.2 2.7 1.9 2.0 1.9 1.8
EU27 GDP 5.3 2.4 1.9 2.1 1.9 1.9
World GDP 5.7 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.6 2.6
World trade 10.5 4.2 4.8 4.1 3.7 3.6
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 4.7 7.2 2.8 2.1 2.1 2.1
OECD CPI 3.6 7.1 3.3 2.3 2.3 2.2
EU27 CPI 2.8 6.4 2.9 2.0 1.9 1.9
Manufactures (measured in US$) 5.8 1.3 2.8 2.6 2.4 1.9
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 70.4 105.6 89.4 76.5 70.5 66.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 37.9 23.6 -8.3 -6.1 -4.9 -3.1
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.1 1.7 3.5 3.1 3.0 3.0
€ 3-month interbank rate (%; av) -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
US$:€ (av) 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
¥:€ (av) 129.92 132.71 142.62 149.29 146.92 146.63
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP 8.0 4.0 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.9
Private consumption 8.1 3.5 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.5
Government consumption 3.9 1.8 -1.0 -1.0 1.5 1.5
Gross fixed investment 19.3 9.5 10.0 14.0 12.0 10.0
Exports of goods & services 21.9 5.0 6.9 7.1 6.6 6.3
Imports of goods & services 16.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.9 6.9
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -0.9 0.0 0.5 0.0 -0.3 -0.2
Domestic demand 7.4 3.9 2.9 3.1 3.2 3.3
Agriculture -8.4 2.5 0.1 0.7 0.9 0.9
Industry 10.0 1.5 1.4 2.2 2.4 2.4
Services 6.9 5.0 3.5 3.4 3.1 2.4
Following real GDP growth of 8% in 2021, we forecast a slowdown to 4% in 2022 and average growth of 3% in 2023-26. Growth in 2022 will be supported by strong carry-over effects from the robust pandemic recovery in late 2021 and early 2022, a strong rebound in tourism as a result of pent-up demand, and disbursements from the EU recovery fund. However, headwinds to growth have strengthened as a result of surging global energy prices and the negative repercussions of the war in Ukraine on commodity prices and supply chains.
A combination of high unemployment, rising prices, high direct and indirect tax rates, heavy household debt relative to disposable income and tight credit conditions will put pressure on private consumption. Following a rebound of 8.1% in 2021, driven largely by the release of pent-up demand after the first pandemic-related lockdown in 2020, we forecast average growth of 2.4% in 2022-26.
Government consumption increased sharply in response to the pandemic, but we expect a gradual adjustment from next year, with an average contraction of 1% in 2023-24. Growth will resume from 2025, averaging 1.5% per year in 2025-26. Pressure on Greece to tighten fiscal policy will be partly offset by a boost to government spending from the EU recovery fund.
We expect the availability of EU recovery funds to support business confidence and boost real fixed investment in Greece. Following a rebound of 19.3% in 2021, we forecast average growth of about 11% per year in 2022-26. However, the recovery will only partly offset the severe depletion of Greece's capital stock during the previous economic crisis.
Tourism, which before the pandemic accounted for about 25% of GDP (including indirect effects) and about half of overall economic growth, has yet to recover fully from a sharp contraction in 2020. We expect the recovery of 2021 to be followed by an even stronger performance in 2022, reflecting significant pent-up demand for tourism services. Greece's exposure to the Russian and Ukrainian tourism markets is small. We forecast that annual growth of exports of goods and services will average 6.4% in 2022-26.




Enlarge this image.
Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends Greece's economy is driven by services, particularly shipping and tourism, and the related real estate sector, as well as financial services, although the relative size of this sector has declined considerably, reflecting the difficulties that the banking system has faced since the sovereign debt crisis. All of these sectors were also particularly badly affected by the coronavirus pandemic and the restrictions put in place to contain it. However, in 2021 tourism-related services rebounded strongly as restrictions were eased and vaccinations were rolled out. The sector looks set to recover further in 2022. By contrast, real estate activities have stagnated after contracting sharply in real terms in 2020, while financial and insurance activities continued to shrink. The government is seeking to diversify the economy further to reduce its over-dependence on tourism and travel by focusing on the development of green and digital industries, but the shift is likely to be slow, given entrenched resistance to reform.
Output in the industrial sector (including construction), which before the pandemic accounted for about 15% of gross value added (GVA) in nominal terms-one of the lowest levels in the EU-contracted sharply during the sovereign debt crisis years, before recovering gradually from 2016. GVA in the sector held up reasonably well in real terms in 2020, and expanded strongly in 2021. Its share of the total in nominal terms increased sharply in 2020 and 2021, to reach 18.4% of gross value added owing to a much sharper decline in the services sector in 2020.
The financial services sector went through a difficult period in the ten years to 2019, suffering from weak profitability, a huge depletion of assets, deleveraging and a major asset quality problem; non-performing loans (NPLs) were about 41% of total loans at end-2019. The sector's growth prospects will be strongly correlated with political stability, continued reform progress now that the third economic adjustment programme has ended (in August 2018), and its ability to reduce NPLs and revive lending. NPLs have been steadily declining, but the ratio of NPLs to total loans of 12.1% at the end of the first quarter of 2022 compared with a euro area average of about 2%. NPLs could rise again if insolvencies increase as the government withdraws pandemic-related support. Profitability is also likely to continue to be squeezed by the low interest-rate environment in the euro zone.
Greece's shipping industry employs 250,000 people and makes an important contribution to the country's GDP. Demand for shipping declined dramatically from mid-2008 to early 2009, owing primarily to sharp reductions in cargoes of commodities such as iron ore and coal. Compared with a peak of 11,793 in May 2008, the Baltic Dry Index (BDI, which measures the demand for shipping capacity against the supply of dry bulk carriers) plummeted during the global financial crisis and has fluctuated in a range of 250-4,100, reflecting bouts of global and regional economic uncertainty, as well as periodic concerns about excess supply in the industry, international trade tensions and, most recently, the negative impact on supply chains of the pandemic and the war in Ukraine. As at mid-June 2022 the index stood at about 2,400, about 25% below its year-earlier level. We expect the pace of world trade growth to slow sharply from 10.5% to an annual average of about 4% per year. However, this should be sufficient to underpin growth in shipping, as long as shipping companies can manage oversupply problems.
Tourism will be the main driver of growth in services The tourism sector plays a major role in the Greek economy and was one of a few bright spots during the country's near-decade-long economic depression. According to World Travel and Tourism Council 2019 data, it contributes about 7.5% to GDP directly and about 20% including indirect effects. Employment in the sector is about 11.5% of total employment directly and 22% including related sectors. In terms of foreign-currency earnings based on the balance of payments, travel credits amounted to EUR18.2bn-or 10% of GDP-in 2019, compared with about 2% in France, 5% in Spain and 8% in Portugal. With just over 31m arrivals, 2019 was a record year for tourism, compared with 30m in 2018, about 27m in 2017 and 25m in 2016.
However, the sector was one of the worst affected by the coronavirus pandemic, with arrivals slumping to 7.4m in 2020 and earnings to EUR4.3bn-or just 2.6% of GDP. A solid, but only partial, recovery was recorded in 2021 as arrivals jumped to 14.7m and earnings to EUR10.5bn-or 5.8% of GDP. We expect the sector to continue to recover steadily during the forecast period, supported by competitive pricing and the perception that Greece managed the pandemic better than some rival tourism destinations. The main downside risk for the sector is that travel restrictions have to be reintroduced in response to the emergence of more vaccine-resistant variants of the coronavirus and another surge in infections.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Consumer price inflation (av; EU harmonised measure) 0.6 7.0 2.8 2.1 1.5 1.5
Average nominal wages (LCU) 1.2 5.9 3.9 3.1 2.6 2.6
Average real wages (LCU) 0.0 -1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
Unit labour costs, business sector (US$) -1.3 -5.1 5.4 5.1 3.1 1.4
Labour costs per hour, manufacturing (US$) 18.4 18.2 19.7 21.3 22.5 23.5
We expect consumer price inflation (EU harmonised measure) to accelerate from an average of 0.6% in 2021 to 7% in 2022, reflecting mainly the impact of the surge in global energy prices. With significant slack remaining in the domestic labour market and an easing of global price pressures, we expect inflation to start to slow towards year-end and average 2% per year in 2023-26.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
Exchange rate US$:€ (end-period) 1.13 1.12 1.18 1.22 1.24 1.25
Exchange rate ¥:€ (av) 129.9 132.7 142.6 149.3 144.9 146.6
Real effective exchange-rate index (2010=100; av) 85.9 84.7 85.7 85.8 85.3 84.5
Purchasing power parity €:US$ (av) 0.54 0.52 0.51 0.50 0.50 0.49
The euro has depreciated sharply against the US dollar since the start of 2022, reaching US$1.07:EUR1 at the end of May. This reflects increased investor concerns in the aftermath of Russia's invasion of Ukraine and a growing divergence between the monetary policy stances of the ECB and the Federal Reserve (the US central bank). In the remainder of 2022 we expect the euro to partly recover against the dollar as the ECB begins to raise interest rates, closing the year at about US$1.12:EUR1. However, the euro area's weaker growth outlook and a pace of monetary tightening that is considerably slower than in the US will continue to weigh on the value of the single currency in the short term. We expect a more sustained appreciatory trend to begin in 2023 as the interest-rate differential with the US narrows. Over the medium term the value of the single currency will continue to be supported by a structural current-account surplus.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Current-account balance -12.7 -12.1 -13.0 -14.1 -17.5 -19.7
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -5.9 -5.7 -5.6 -5.6 -6.5 -6.9
Goods: exports fob 46.3 52.7 51.1 54.6 58.8 63.6
Goods: imports fob -76.6 -87.2 -93.6 -102.5 -111.8 -120.9
Trade balance -30.3 -34.5 -42.5 -48.0 -52.9 -57.3
Services: credit 41.4 45.4 54.8 61.6 67.3 72.3
Services: debit -26.1 -27.3 -30.3 -33.4 -36.5 -39.4
Services balance 15.4 18.1 24.5 28.2 30.8 33.0
Primary income: credit 7.2 6.8 6.9 7.1 7.1 7.1
Primary income: debit -6.4 -6.0 -6.3 -6.6 -6.8 -6.9
Primary income balance 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.2
Secondary income balance 1.5 3.6 4.4 5.2 4.2 4.5
Greece's current-account deficit narrowed from 6.6% of GDP in 2020 to 5.9% of GDP in 2021 as tourism earnings recovered and Greece began to draw down its allocation of EU recovery fund grants. We expect the deficit to remain at about 5.6% of GDP in 2022-24 as further disbursements of EU recovery funds (EUR5.3bn per year is forecast in 2022-23) and a continued recovery in the tourism sector offset the impact of higher global energy prices. From 2025 we expect the deficit to widen again, reaching 6.9% of GDP by 2026, as the drawdown of EU recovery funds ends and solid domestic demand drives rising imports.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Greece Stocks and flows Greece is a small host of inward foreign direct investment (FDI) compared with other EU countries. Stocks and inflows are well below those of many of the central and east European countries that joined the EU in 2004. FDI outflows have in some years exceeded inflows. Most inflows have been for the acquisition of existing companies either through privatisation sales or joint ventures with local partners. There has been significant disinvestment since the advent of the sovereign debt crisis, particularly in the retail and banking sectors; according to data from the IMF (based on data by the Bank of Greece, the central bank), the stock of FDI fell from a peak of US$55.1bn (17.5% of GDP) in 2007 to US$25.6bn (10.8% of GDP) in 2014. The stock has since risen, to reach US$51.4bn (23.8% of GDP) at the end of 2021. Despite the increase in 2015-21, Greece's FDI stock remained far below the levels of new EU member states in the former communist Balkans, Bulgaria (an estimated US$57bn in 2021; about 71% of GDP) and Romania (an estimated US$121bn; about 43% of GDP). Greek companies' FDI stock abroad was US$51.7bn (18.2% of GDP) at end-2011. Much of this outward investment was in the Balkan region, although Greek companies have also looked further afield, to invest in North Africa, Turkey and, in a few cases, the US. The outward stock had declined to US$19.6bn by end-2021, equivalent to 9.1% of GDP, as a result of retrenchment by Greek companies and banks.
With FDI inflows drying up after the onset of the economic crisis and outflows falling less sharply, net negative FDI flows were registered in 2010-11. In 2012-13 net inflows turned positive, but this was mainly the result of inflows from foreign banks recapitalising subsidiaries before divestment. Net inflows turned negative again in 2014-15, amid acute political and economic uncertainty. In 2016-18, after Greece signed a third economic adjustment programme in August 2015, there was a pick-up in FDI inflows and positive net investment, leading to six consecutive years of positive net investment averaging US$3.8bn per year in 2016-21.
Origin and distribution Historically, the US was a major source of FDI for Greece in heavy industries such as refining and chemicals. However, since Greece entered the common market, EU countries, particularly Germany, the Netherlands and Luxembourg (because of its status as a financial hub for special-purpose entities-SPEs-created by multinationals for inward and outward FDI), have become the main investors, primarily in financial services and telecommunications, as these sectors have been liberalised. However, since the height of the Greek crisis most foreign firms have sold off their interests in Greece's financial services sector, resulting in net negative inward FDI stock figures for the sector for eight consecutive years in 2012-19, according to Bank of Greece data. In 2020 the figure turned positive to the tune of about EUR1bn. In 2020 Germany, the Netherlands and Luxembourg accounted for 50% of Greece's total inward FDI stock. However, retrenchment in Europe led to a search for funding from Middle Eastern sovereign funds (Dubai and Qatar) and pursuit of investment from China, particularly through the China Development Bank. A number of Chinese transport and logistics companies have made large investments in Greece with a view to creating a gateway into the EU for Chinese manufactures. However, such investments have come under increased scrutiny as a result the screening regime introduced by the EU in late 2020. According to the Bank of Greece, in 2020 information and communication accounted for the largest share of the inward FDI stock, at 15.4%, followed by retail and wholesale trade (11.4%); refined petroleum, transport and storage (9.6%); and chemical products, pharmaceutical and plastic products (6.8%). Encouraged by government incentives, foreign real estate investment has risen sharply, accounting for 11.9% of total FDI stock in 2020. Probably reflecting the predominance of small, family-owned operations in the tourism industry, the hotel and restaurant sector FDI stock is modest at just 2.4% of the total, given the sector's overall importance in the Greek economy.
Determinants Factors that have traditionally held back greater levels of inward direct investment include Greece's geographical remoteness from core EU markets; its small domestic market; excessive product and market regulation; underdeveloped transport and communications infrastructure; a reluctance to allow companies in so-called strategic sectors to be majority foreign-owned; widespread red tape and corruption; and an unstable tax regime. Political factors have sometimes come into play, such as Greece's historically tense relations with Turkey.
Impact The share of FDI inflows in gross fixed investment in Greece is well below the EU average. Increased foreign participation in privatised or part-privatised companies would boost productivity. In April 2016 Greece sold a majority stake in Piraeus Port Authority, the state-owned company that controls Pier I and the port's cruise, passenger and car terminal operations, to China's Cosco. The investment has turned Piraeus into one of the biggest and fastest-growing ports in the region, opening the way for the site to become a major multimodal transhipment hub in the Mediterranean and the most important sea trade gateway into Europe, potentially bringing significant benefits to the economy. Investment by South Europe Gateway Thessaloniki (SEGT), the German-led consortium that operates the Thessaloniki Port Authority, has helped to increase throughput at Greece's second-largest port.
Potential Greece holds relatively few attractions for FDI in the short term for investors, with the exception of investors specialising in distressed assets. The payoff from structural reforms in terms of increased competitiveness will take years to materialise fully and could yet be reversed in the medium term now that Greece has exited its EU-backed economic adjustment programme. In the medium term the country will offer opportunities for investment in renewable energy and greenfield new technology ventures if red tape continues to be reduced and the reduction in labour costs is maintained. EIU projects average annual FDI inflows of about US$7.9bn in 2022-26 (the forecast period).
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2016 2021 2026
Population (m)
Total 10.6 10.4 10.1
 Male 5.2 5.1 5.0
 Female 5.4 5.3 5.1
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 14.7 14.4 13.3
 15-64 63.9 62.9 62.3
 65+ 21.4 22.7 24.4
Young-age dependency ratio 0.23 0.23 0.21
Old-age dependency ratio 0.34 0.36 0.39
Working-age population (m) 6.8 6.5 6.3
Urbanisation (% of total) 78.4 80.1 81.8
Labour force (m) 4.8 4.6 4.7
       
Period averages   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth (%)   -0.5 -0.5
Working-age population growth (%)   -0.8 -0.7
Labour force growth (%)   -0.8 0.5
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   8.1 7.1
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   10.7 11.2
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   3.7 3.5
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   79.3 80.2
 Female   84.3 84.9
 Average   81.8 82.6
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; EIU estimates and forecasts; national statistics.
Age structure set to change dramatically over long term According to UN projections, the population will decline by an average of 0.5% per year in 2022-26 (the forecast period). However, life expectancy is increasing, and in 2021 it was estimated to average 81.8 years-broadly in line with the EU27 average of 80.4 (2020). The population structure by age already bears all the hallmarks of the demographic ageing process, with the decline in the working-age population and rise in the elderly population (65 years and older) projected to continue. The proportion of people aged over 65 is forecast to rise from an estimated 22.7% in 2021 to 24.4% in 2026. Population ageing will prove to be a burden on already heavily indebted social services, particularly the pension and healthcare systems.
The economic impact of an ageing population will be exacerbated to some degree by the continued decline in the working-age population during the forecast period, which means that the old-age dependency ratio (the ratio of people aged above 65 to the working-age population) will rise compared with the previous five years. EIU forecasts that the population of people of working age will decrease by an average of 0.7% per year in 2022-26, which is marginally slower than the average in 2017-21. The labour force, however, is now projected to rise by an average of 0.5% over the forecast period, reversing a sharp decline of 0.8% on average in 2017-21, driven by higher participation rates due to a rise in the effective retirement age and an increase in the number of women in work. The decline in the historical period reflects the impact of the emigration of young, skilled workers leaving Greece to seek employment opportunities elsewhere and the arrival of fewer economic migrants. The labour force participation rate for women is much lower than that for men and is one of the lowest in the EU. The gender gap (the difference between the employment rates of men and women of working age (15-64) in Greece was about 18 percentage points in 2021 (Eurostat), compared with an EU27 average of about 10 percentage points. The narrowest gap (about 1 percentage point) was in Lithuania and the widest in Romania (about 18.5 percentage points). In the first quarter of 2022 the unemployment rate for males was 10.5%, compared with 18% for females. We expect to see a gradual increase in the employment rate for women and a narrowing of the gender gap in unemployment rates over the medium and long term.
According to Eurostat, the foreign-born population of Greece as at January 1st 2021 was 1.36m-equivalent to 12.8% of the total population, with about three-quarters of these being born outside the EU. In 2015 controversial legislation granted Greek citizenship to second-generation immigrants. Prior to the new law, children born to migrants in Greece received a "maternity clinic certificate", not a birth certificate, leaving them without proper legal status. As they were not Greek nationals, they were not entitled to the same rights-such as travelling, working and studying within the EU-as EU citizens.
The migrant influx via Turkey and Greece into Europe in 2015-16 posed big challenges for the authorities. About 800,000 migrants arrived in Greece in 2015, according to the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. The closure of the western Balkan migrant route in February 2016 led to about 55,000 migrants becoming trapped in Greece. In March 2016 the Turkey-EU joint action plan stemmed the influx into Greece of migrants from Turkey. However, Greece is vulnerable to another migration upsurge given its extensive and porous land and sea borders, the refugee crisis in Syria and Afghanistan, and an increase in tensions with Turkey.
Immigration has become contentious issue Legislation regarding permanent residence and working rights is in line with EU regulations, allowing non-EU persons legally resident in the country for five years to acquire permanent resident status. Since 2006 all immigration has been linked to employment criteria based on available jobs, and these are posted at consulates abroad. Persons wishing to work in Greece have to acquire a permit through the consulate in their home country before arriving. Persons arriving in the country on student or tourist permits are not allowed to change their status and take employment. Those seeking to establish themselves in Greece as self-employed or as entrepreneurs have had to fulfil detailed criteria demonstrating their relevant experience and supply evidence of having sufficient funds to support themselves so that they do not become dependent on the state. In 2020 the government introduced a 7% flat income-tax rate for ten years for new foreign retirees to Greece. In September 2021 the government passed legislation to introduce a special visa regime and generous tax relief for foreign, self-employed digital workers.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Population (m) 10.4 10.3 10.3 10.2 10.2 10.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 215.8 212.9 232.0 250.7 268.4 283.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 20,806 20,639 22,603 24,556 26,429 28,070
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 338.6 371.6 395.0 417.3 438.4 460.9
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 32,646 36,016 38,489 40,883 43,170 45,613
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 209.4 207.4 224.9 244.9 262.4 276.6
Household consumption (US$ bn) 149.6 147.9 159.2 172.6 184.2 194.1
Household consumption per head (US$) 14,420 14,330 15,520 16,910 18,140 19,210
Exports of goods & services (% change) 21.9 5.0 6.9 7.1 6.6 6.3
Imports of goods & services (% change) 16.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.9 6.9
Greece is a small, fragmented market of about 10.5m people, about 12% of whom live on its many islands. As a result, distribution has typically been a problem, which is exacerbated when the population is swollen by large numbers of tourists in the high season. In 2019 Greece attracted a record 31m visitors (almost triple the population of Greece itself). However, international travel restrictions introduced in response to the coronavirus outbreak since March 2020 caused the number of foreign visitors to the country to plummet by nearly 80% in 2020. A recovery in the number of visitors began in 2021, which should help to revive market opportunities, despite the moderate projected growth of the wider Greek economy.
Even after coronavirus-related international travel restrictions are lifted, the movement of commercial visitors to and from non-EU countries will continue to be affected, particularly as Greece is a signatory to the Schengen Agreement, which places tough controls on external borders. Greece has been in the front line of recent mass migration into Europe-mainly from the Middle East and North Africa-that peaked in 2015. Road and rail development should gradually improve access between Greece and its Balkan neighbours in the coming years, enhancing the country's role as a distribution centre for the southern Balkans, as will development of the ports of Thessaloniki, Kavala and Alexandroupolis.
Market opportunities will pick up but consumer spending power constrained Over the forecast period (2022-26) market opportunities in Greece will be constrained by consumers' limited spending power. Soaring energy prices, still-high unemployment, high taxes, only a partial recovery in wage levels, tight credit conditions and the need to generate large government primary surplus targets to reduce Greece's huge public debt of just below 200% of GDP will make consumers cautious about spending over the forecast period. During the pandemic GDP per head (at market exchange rates) slumped to an estimated US$18,160 in 2020-well below the EU average. This recovered to US$20,806 in 2021 and is forecast to rise to US$28,070 by 2026. This primarily reflects a projected recovery in GDP, from a low base, following the coronavirus crisis, but also a shrinking population.
The after-effects of the coronavirus crisis in 2020-21 will continue to reshape market opportunities, which had already changed considerably during the depression in 2008-13, the truncated recovery in 2014 and the renewed economic downturn in 2015-16. A return to the rapid pre-crisis increases in one-person households is unlikely over the medium term, as the number of single people able to afford their own household will not continue to rise. This will have negative follow-through effects on demand in various consumer goods markets, such as white goods, consumer electronics and furniture. Other consumer durables that relied on a buoyant, debt-fuelled economy for sales growth are also likely to suffer, as households will show restraint with regard to big-ticket purchases in the forecast period. Internal migration to the cities will continue, although at a slower rate than before the sovereign debt crisis, as young people abandon farming because of falling EU subsidies and the hope of better employment opportunities in the big cities: Athens (the capital), Thessaloniki and Larissa.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 34,584 34,347 36,676 38,771 40,579 41,530
Housing & household fuels 31,939 30,285 31,950 33,990 36,034 37,863
Clothing & footwear 5,723 5,682 6,080 6,591 7,074 7,495
Household goods & services 4,240 4,027 4,266 4,541 4,797 5,009
Health 6,960 6,603 6,983 7,463 7,960 8,420
Transport & communications 23,595 23,554 25,184 27,289 29,509 31,625
Leisure & education 10,741 10,517 11,402 12,237 13,079 13,843
Hotels & restaurants 19,010 19,788 22,739 26,391 28,297 30,038
Other 12,793 13,083 13,966 15,370 16,847 18,283
Total 149,585 147,887 159,244 172,644 184,176 194,106
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 23.1 23.2 23.0 22.5 22.0 21.4
Housing & household fuels 21.4 20.5 20.1 19.7 19.6 19.5
Clothing & footwear 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.9
Household goods & services 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.6 2.6 2.6
Health 4.7 4.5 4.4 4.3 4.3 4.3
Transport & communications 15.8 15.9 15.8 15.8 16.0 16.3
Leisure & education 7.2 7.1 7.2 7.1 7.1 7.1
Hotels & restaurants 12.7 13.4 14.3 15.3 15.4 15.5
Other 8.6 8.8 8.8 8.9 9.1 9.4
Food, beverages and tobacco, together with housing, household fuel, and household goods and services, absorbed just under 50% of consumer expenditure in 2021, declining to about 45% in 2026. Demand for housing will fall as a percentage of GDP compared with other items over the forecast period, in line with the broadly stagnant number of households over the next five years. Non-essential spending will generally also be held back by increased saving efforts by the population, as well as debt-reduction moves. Greater spending power among the immigrant community and population ageing will have important influences on consumption patterns during the forecast period, providing support to demand for communication and healthcare services.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2021   2026  
  Greece Western Europe (av) Greece Western Europe (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 8.0 11.3 7.8 11.1
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 1,662 5,244 2,209 6,723
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 3.6 3.2 3.3 3.0
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 5.5 4.0 5.5 4.2
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 23.1 16.6 21.4 15.5
Meat consumption (kg per person) 79.6 89.6 89.6 94.7
Milk consumption (litres per person) 273.0 261.0 282.0 276.0
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 6.7 6.2 7.1 6.6
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 464 559 489 547
Telephone main lines 439 415 404 404
Mobile phone subscribers 1,100 1,210 1,110 1,240
Television sets 1,459 837 1,838 933
Personal computers 747 843 790 867
Households
No. of households (m) 4.5 193.1 4.8 200.9
No. of people per household (av) 2.3 2.2 2.1 2.1
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 39,970 53,480 49,310 63,320
Average monthly wage (US$) 1,890 4,150 2,280 5,010
Gini index 33.1 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; Pyramid Research; EIU estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population -0.50 -0.47 -0.48
Working-age population -0.76 -1.36 -1.17
Working-age minus total population -0.26 -0.90 -0.70
Labour force -0.06 -1.10 -0.78
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 3.1 2.2 2.5
Growth of real GDP 2.6 1.7 2.0
Labour productivity growth 2.4 2.9 2.7
Growth of capital stock 3.5 3.5 3.5
Total factor productivity growth 1.1 1.2 1.2
EIU forecasts that Greek real GDP growth will average 2% per year in 2022-50. We expect annual growth to average 2.6% in 2022-30, slowing to 1.7% in 2031-50. This trajectory reflects the greater negative effect of demographic trends in 2031-50 compared with 2022-30, especially the contraction in the working-age population, which becomes more significant as time goes on. Reasonable total factor productivity and capital stock growth will support a continued economic expansion in 2022-50, offsetting the negative contribution of labour to GDP growth from 2030.
Initial conditions: Several factors will hold back potential long-term GDP growth in Greece. The economy has a number of deep structural flaws that will continue to hinder growth in 2022-30 and 2031-50. In particular, a decline of just under 60% in real fixed investment in 2008-21 will undermine the economy's ability to generate growth over the longer term. It also remains to be seen how much permanent damage is inflicted by the coronavirus pandemic crisis in terms of, for example, labour market scarring and possible changes in international travel trends. There could be a significant boost to growth potential if the availability of EU recovery funds from 2022 spurs economic reforms, although our baseline forecast assumes that existing political and institutional shortcomings will continue to hinder implementation. We expect that agricultural products, renewable energy, tourism and shipping will remain Greece's principal exports in the long term, but the success of these and other industries will also depend on the restoration of competitiveness to the economy inside the euro zone (we are sceptical that a return to competitiveness and catch-up growth can be accomplished as long as Greece retains the euro, hence our forecast that the risk of "Grexit" will rise over the long term). A marked deterioration in the demographic profile will result in diminishing opportunities to increase labour utilisation.
Demographic trends: The demographic profile becomes increasingly unfavourable in 2022-50. The working-age population will decline steadily, despite immigration. Life expectancy is high, reflecting good living conditions and health standards (at least until recently). The birth rate is set to remain below the replacement level; since 2012 the crude death rate has exceeded the crude birth rate every year. The number of people aged 65 and over will increase from an estimated 2.3m in 2021 to 2.6m by 2030 and 3.3m by 2050. The number of people of working age will decline from 6.6m to 6.2m and 4.7m over the same periods.
Transport links to neighbours should improve External conditions: Greece is geographically remote from the EU market, although less so since the EU's expansion to include Bulgaria and Romania in January 2007. Greece will continue with infrastructure projects to improve transport links with the southern Balkan states of Albania, Macedonia and Bulgaria (in part subsidised by the EU). Provided that the Balkan region can improve political and economic stability, better transport links with the countries to the north are expected to help to attract some investment from foreign companies wishing to establish a base in south-east Europe from a more established Western market. However, existing EU27 members are divided on the question of eastward enlargement, which has slowed progress and could encourage the countries of the western Balkans to seek other patrons, including China, Russia, Turkey and the UAE. We also believe that there remains a risk that Greece will leave the euro area over the long term as currency devaluation becomes the preferred method to restore competitiveness. However, even if Greece were to leave the euro area, we expect that it would remain a member of the EU.
Greek and EU relations with Turkey will also influence Greece's long-term economic prospects. Relations between Greece and Turkey had been improving since mid-1999, but took a turn for the worse in 2016-19 over the Cyprus question, and again in August 2020 over hydrocarbons exploration by Turkey in disputed areas of the Eastern Mediterranean. Relations are set to remain volatile and we do not expect progress in the dispute over Cyprus. The EU opened membership negotiations with Turkey in October 2005. Some large EU member states, such as Germany and France, stalled the talks on technical grounds. A deal over migration between the EU and Turkey in April 2016 was meant to revive the stalled accession negotiation process, but talks have remained in the doldrums. Our forecast is that Turkey will not join the EU as it is currently shaped. Even so, we expect that political tensions will have only a limited impact on broadly positive trade and investment relations between Greece and Turkey.
Political stability will be imperilled by public distrust of all political parties Institutions and policy trends: Greece has a well-established parliamentary democracy. However, the political system is prone to instability owing to government ineffectiveness and the erosion of public trust in the mainstream political parties. A renewed migration surge into Europe along the Balkan route as a result of war and state breakdown in the Middle East could potentially threaten social stability. Institutional effectiveness should improve moderately in 2022-50, but progress is likely to be constrained by pervasive corruption, political patronage and bureaucratic resistance to change.
We expect that red tape will be reduced moderately and that the tax system will become more efficient. Labour law has been changed to ease the hiring and firing of workers and to give priority to labour agreements at the company level. However, we expect that the adoption of structural reforms to boost competitiveness will be inconsistent and will make a difference only over the longer term. Public debt and the cost of supporting an ageing population will remain high, leaving little room for a substantial cut in the overall burden of taxes and social security contributions.
Long-term performance: We expect real GDP to grow at 2.6% per year on average in 2022-30 (3.1% per head). Over 2031-50 average annual GDP growth is forecast to be 1.7% (2.2% per head). Labour productivity growth is expected to average 2.7% per year over the entire long-term forecast period. Scope for a further rise in labour force participation rates will be reduced, and we expect a decline in the working-age population. We expect the labour force to shrink by an annual average of 0.1% in 2022-30, and by 1.1% per year in 2031-50, resulting in an annual average fall of 0.8% in 2021-50.
Income and market size
  2021 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 10.5 9.9 9.0
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 215.8 321.8 571.3
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 20,810 32,450 63,270
Private consumption (US$ bn) 149.6 210.1 337.9
Private consumption per head (US$) 14,420 21,190 37,430
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 338.6 538.7 1,129.2
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 32,650 54,320 125,060
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 87.9 150.8 517.8
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 105.0 181.3 566.1
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 47.3 55.4 67.4
Share of world population (%) 0.1 0.1 0.1
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.2 0.2 0.1
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.2 0.2 0.2
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 0.3 0.3 0.4
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability Climate change is predicted to have significant negative effects on the natural ecosystems of Greece and on many important economic sectors over the long term; for example, it will affect biodiversity, species and habitat, agriculture, forestry, fisheries, tourism, transport, activities in coastal areas, and the built environment in urban centres, owing mainly to increased temperature, drought, extreme weather events and rising sea levels. According to specific climate change studies pertaining to Greece, the effects will lead to reductions in productivity, capital losses and additional costs arising from damage repair. According to a study by the Bank of Greece (the central bank) in 2011, under an inaction ("business as usual") scenario, Greek GDP could fall by an annual 2% by 2050 and 6% by 2100. It states that the total cumulative cost to the Greek economy could reach about EUR700bn (at constant prices of 2008) by 2100. An updated study was due to be published in 2021, but as at mid-June 2022 had still not been released. According to our long-term economic model, by 2050 climate change will subtract 3.45% from forecast real GDP.
There is thus a clear necessity for the adoption of mitigation and adaptation policies. For example, the tourism and shipping sectors are of vital importance for Greece. The focus is on "Blue Growth", which is a long-term strategy to support integrated sustainable growth in the marine and maritime sectors. The Mediterranean region, where Greece is situated, is bordered by more than 20 countries, and a large part of the Mediterranean Sea remains outside national jurisdiction. As a result, co-operation on issues such as climate change and the environment is vital in order to manage maritime activities, tackle climate impacts, protect the marine environment and fight pollution in the Mediterranean region.
Greece adopted its first National Climate Change Programme in 1995; the second was adopted in 2002 and revised in 2007 and 2019. All four iterations placed great emphasis on achieving a reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by changing the fuel mix to include a higher percentage of natural gas and renewable energy sources; improving energy efficiency and conservation in all sectors; making structural changes in agriculture and transport; reducing emissions in waste management; and expanding research and development efforts. In 2016 Greece adopted the National Strategy for Adapting to Climate Change (ESPKA) through Law 4414/2016, which sets out general objectives, guidelines and means of implementation. According to the strategy, mitigation policies and adaptation should be adopted in all fields, but especially in those of energy, clean technology, industry, biodiversity, agriculture, tourism and transport. The Ministry of Environment and Energy is responsible for identifying potential climate change impacts, planning and co-ordinating adaptation measures and policies, and preparing a national adaptation strategy. The Climate Law approved by parliament in May 2022 contains targets for Greece to cut greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by at least 55% compared with 1990 levels by 2030, by 80% by 2040 and zero-net emissions by 2050. These targets are more ambitious than those set out in The National Energy and Climate Plan (NECP) published in December 2019, which envisages GHG emissions cuts of 42% by 2030.
Demographic and productivity headwinds The UN's long-term population projections for Greece, which EIU uses in its long-term growth forecasts, assume a decline in the overall population from an estimated 10.4m in 2021 to 9.9m in 2030 and 9m in 2050. Falling fertility rates and continued outward emigration will result in a rapidly shrinking and ageing population. Greece's working-age population is projected to fall from an estimated 6.6m in 2021 to 6.2m in 2030 and 4.7m in 2050; that is a decline of 29% over the 2022-50 period. This is one of the steepest declines in the euro area. We forecast an only moderately slower decline in the labour force, of 20%, from 4.6m in 2021 to 3.7m in 2050; this assumes an increase in the labour participation rate in the coming decades as the retirement age is raised and more women enter the labour force.
Such adverse demographic projections would imply a severely negative effect on long-term real GDP growth rates. This is especially worrying given Greece's poor historical track record when it comes to productivity growth. To achieve even the modest average annual long-term real GDP growth rate of 1.7% that we forecast for 2022-50 will require significant improvements in employment, labour participation and productivity growth rates, which Greece has not achieved in recent decades. Over the past 45 years Greece's total factor productivity growth averaged 0.2% per year, and since joining the euro zone in 2001 it has turned negative.
A rebound in investment is likely given the low levels to which it has sunk over the past decade and a potential boost from EU recovery funds, but this positive effect will not persist over decades. Once the capital stock is replenished, the boost to growth will dissipate and the negative effects of poor demographics and productivity will reassert themselves. The emphasis must therefore be on policies to raise employment rates and boost total factor productivity to avert the disaster of negative average growth rates over the long term. However, the empirical evidence suggests that even the most comprehensive structural reform programme aimed at transforming productivity and the labour market may not deliver the sort of pay-off in terms of growth that is needed.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 3.2 3.0 2.3 -3.7 5.7 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.6 2.6
EU27 GDP growth 2.9 2.1 1.8 -6.1 5.3 2.4 1.9 2.1 1.9 1.9
Western Europe growth 2.9 1.9 1.5 -6.0 5.9 2.6 1.7 2.0 1.8 1.8
World trade growth 5.6 3.8 0.3 -4.9 10.5 4.2 4.8 4.1 3.7 3.6
US CPI 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.7 7.2 2.8 2.1 2.1 2.1
EU27 CPI 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.8 6.4 2.9 2.0 1.9 1.9
Manufactures export price 2.0 5.1 -1.4 0.8 5.8 1.3 2.8 2.6 2.4 1.9
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 70.4 105.6 89.4 76.5 70.5 66.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
Exchange rate ¥:€ (av) 126.63 130.47 122.07 121.85 129.92 132.71 142.62 149.29 146.92 146.63
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Expenditure on GDP (€ bn at current market prices)
GDP 176.9 179.3 182.6 165.9 182.3 193.9 203.0 209.8 218.2 227.8
Private consumption 122.1 124.3 126.1 115.4 126.4 134.7 139.4 144.5 149.7 155.9
Government consumption 36.3 35.7 36.7 37.6 39.0 41.8 43.2 44.5 46.5 48.7
Gross fixed investment 20.7 20.0 19.4 19.3 23.5 26.3 29.2 33.7 38.1 42.3
Exports of goods & services 62.0 70.0 73.5 52.9 74.3 89.5 94.1 98.5 103.6 110.0
Imports of goods & services 64.7 73.9 76.7 65.4 88.7 105.9 110.9 116.9 124.8 133.6
Stockbuilding 0.4 3.0 3.5 6.1 8.0 7.5 8.0 5.5 5.0 4.5
Domestic demand 179.6 183.1 185.8 178.4 196.8 210.3 219.8 228.2 239.4 251.4
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 199.7 211.8 204.5 189.3 215.8 212.9 232.0 250.7 268.4 283.6
Private consumption 137.9 146.9 141.2 131.7 149.6 147.9 159.2 172.6 184.2 194.1
Government consumption 41.0 42.2 41.1 42.9 46.1 45.9 49.3 53.2 57.2 60.6
Gross fixed investment 23.4 23.7 21.7 22.0 27.8 28.9 33.4 40.2 46.9 52.7
Exports of goods & services 70.0 82.7 82.3 60.3 87.9 98.3 107.5 117.7 127.5 137.0
Imports of goods & services 73.1 87.3 85.8 74.7 105.0 116.3 126.7 139.7 153.5 166.4
Stockbuilding 0.5 3.6 3.9 6.9 9.4 8.2 9.1 6.6 6.2 5.6
Domestic demand 202.8 216.3 208.0 203.6 232.9 230.9 251.1 272.7 294.4 313.0
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 69.0 69.4 69.1 69.6 69.3 69.5 68.7 68.9 68.6 68.4
Government consumption 20.5 19.9 20.1 22.7 21.4 21.6 21.3 21.2 21.3 21.4
Gross fixed investment 11.7 11.2 10.6 11.6 12.9 13.6 14.4 16.1 17.5 18.6
Stockbuilding 0.3 1.7 1.9 3.7 4.4 3.9 3.9 2.6 2.3 2.0
Exports of goods & services 35.0 39.1 40.3 31.9 40.7 46.1 46.3 47.0 47.5 48.3
Imports of goods & services 36.6 41.2 42.0 39.4 48.7 54.6 54.6 55.7 57.2 58.7
Memorandum item
National savings ratio (%) 10.1 10.0 11.0 8.7 11.3 11.8 12.7 13.1 13.2 13.6
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Real expenditure on GDP (€ bn at chained 2015 market prices)
GDP 177.4 180.2 183.3 167.4 180.8 188.1 193.7 199.7 205.4 211.3
Private consumption 122.9 125.0 126.5 117.1 126.6 131.1 133.7 136.5 139.3 142.9
Government consumption 36.0 34.9 35.3 36.2 37.6 38.3 37.9 37.5 38.1 38.7
Gross fixed investment 21.1 20.3 19.6 19.5 23.3 25.5 28.1 32.0 35.8 39.4
Exports of goods & services 61.2 66.8 70.1 55.0 67.0 70.4 75.3 80.6 86.0 91.4
Imports of goods & services 64.5 69.2 71.3 65.7 76.4 81.2 86.3 91.9 98.3 105.0
Stockbuilding (% of GDP) 0.5 3.0 3.0 5.4 3.9 4.0 5.0 5.0 4.5 4.0
Domestic demand 180.5 183.2 184.4 178.3 191.5 198.9 204.7 211.0 217.7 224.9
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 1.1 1.5 1.8 -8.7 8.0 4.0 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.9
Private consumption 2.5 1.7 1.2 -7.4 8.1 3.5 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.5
Government consumption -0.7 -3.1 1.3 2.5 3.9 1.8 -1.0 -1.0 1.5 1.5
Gross fixed investment 9.1 -4.0 -3.4 -0.4 19.3 9.5 10.0 14.0 12.0 10.0
Exports of goods & services 8.5 9.1 4.9 -21.5 21.9 5.0 6.9 7.1 6.6 6.3
Imports of goods & services 7.6 7.2 3.1 -7.9 16.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.9 6.9
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -1.6 1.4 0.0 1.3 -0.9 0.0 0.5 0.0 -0.3 -0.2
Domestic demand 0.9 1.5 0.7 -3.3 7.4 3.9 2.9 3.1 3.2 3.3
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 1.7 1.2 0.8 -5.1 5.7 2.5 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.7
Government consumption -0.2 -0.6 0.3 0.5 0.8 0.4 -0.2 -0.2 0.3 0.3
Gross fixed investment 1.0 -0.5 -0.4 0.0 2.3 1.2 1.4 2.0 1.9 1.7
External balance 0.1 0.5 0.6 -5.2 0.8 -0.8 -0.1 -0.2 -0.5 -0.6
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Origin of GDP (€ bn at chained 2015 prices)
GDP at factor cost 157.2 159.1 160.9 147.1 157.7 164.1 169.0 174.2 179.2 184.4
Agriculture 7.1 7.0 7.4 7.0 6.5 6.6 6.6 6.7 6.7 6.8
Industry 25.6 26.4 26.9 27.6 30.3 30.8 31.2 31.9 32.7 33.4
Services 124.3 125.5 126.2 113.0 120.7 126.7 131.2 135.7 139.8 143.2
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 13.0 -2.0 5.3 -4.2 -8.4 2.5 0.1 0.7 0.9 0.9
Industry -1.1 3.3 1.6 2.7 10.0 1.5 1.4 2.2 2.4 2.4
Services 1.6 0.9 0.6 -10.5 6.9 5.0 3.5 3.4 3.1 2.4
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) c 4.1 1.8 -0.8 -1.9 10.1 2.3 3.1 2.6 2.2 2.2
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c Total industrial production excluding construction.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth -1.3 -0.6 0.0 a -7.6 a 5.7 a 3.0 2.0 2.1 1.9 1.9
Total factor productivity growth -0.8 0.0 0.8 -7.9 6.2 2.5 1.1 1.4 1.0 0.8
Growth of capital stock -0.9 -0.4 -0.4 0.0 1.1 1.9 2.2 3.0 3.6 4.1
Growth of potential GDP -0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.4 3.1 3.0 2.8 2.3 2.3
Growth of real GDP 1.1 1.5 1.8 a -8.7 a 8.0 a 4.0 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.9
Growth of real GDP per head 1.5 2.0 2.2 a -8.2 a 8.5 4.6 3.6 3.6 3.4 3.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 10.6 10.5 10.5 10.4 10.4 10.3 10.3 10.2 10.2 10.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 199.7 211.8 204.5 189.3 215.8 a 212.9 232.0 250.7 268.4 283.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 18,900 20,130 19,520 18,160 20,810 20,640 22,600 24,560 26,430 28,070
Private consumption (US$ bn) 137.9 146.9 141.2 131.7 149.6 a 147.9 159.2 172.6 184.2 194.1
Private consumption per head (US$) 13,050 13,960 13,480 12,640 14,420 14,330 15,520 16,910 18,140 19,210
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 307.6 317.3 324.4 300.0 338.6 a 371.6 395.0 417.3 438.4 460.9
GDP (€ bn) 176.9 179.3 182.6 165.9 182.3 193.9 203.0 209.8 218.2 227.8
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 29,100 30,160 30,970 28,790 32,650 36,020 38,490 40,880 43,170 45,610
Personal disposable income (€ bn) 168.2 b 171.5 b 174.6 b 173.7 b 176.9 188.9 196.8 204.9 213.4 222.2
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 190.0 b 202.6 b 195.5 b 198.2 b 209.4 207.4 224.9 244.9 262.4 276.6
Growth of real disposable income (%) 1.2 b 1.8 b 1.6 b 0.6 b 0.5 3.7 2.7 2.5 2.5 2.5
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13
Share of GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.25 0.25 0.24 0.23 0.23 a 0.21 0.22 0.22 0.23 0.23
Share of GDP (% at PPP) 0.26 0.25 0.24 0.23 0.23 a 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.40 0.44 0.45 0.35 0.40 a 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.45 0.51
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 48.6 48.6 48.0 59.7 57.0 56.8 56.3 56.3 55.5 54.5
Interest 3.1 3.4 3.0 3.0 2.5 2.5 3.0 3.6 3.6 3.5
Non-interest 45.4 45.2 45.0 56.7 54.6 54.3 53.3 52.7 51.9 51.0
Government revenue 49.1 49.5 49.2 49.6 49.6 52.0 52.6 53.0 53.0 52.7
Government balance 0.6 0.9 1.2 -10.1 -7.5 -4.9 -3.7 -3.3 -2.5 -1.8
Primary balance 3.7 4.3 4.2 -7.1 -5.0 -2.4 -0.7 0.3 1.1 1.8
Government debt 179.5 186.7 181.3 205.7 193.8 188.4 184.9 182.2 177.7 172.0
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
Exchange rate US$:€ (year-end) 1.20 1.15 1.12 1.23 1.13 1.12 1.18 1.22 1.24 1.25
Exchange rate ¥:€ (av) 126.63 130.47 122.07 121.85 129.92 132.71 142.62 149.29 146.92 146.63
Exchange rate £:€ (av) 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.86 0.83 0.85 0.87 0.86 0.84
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 90.31 90.82 88.86 87.74 85.94 84.68 85.72 85.82 85.30 84.52
Purchasing power parity €:US$ (av) 0.58 0.56 0.56 0.55 0.54 0.52 0.51 0.50 0.50 0.49
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 6.4 4.1 7.5 12.2 10.5 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0
Domestic credit growth (%) -5.6 -18.1 -7.9 11.4 -10.7 9.3 11.8 5.8 3.5 3.0
Commercial banks' prime rate (av; %) 5.2 5.0 4.6 4.2 4.0 4.2 5.4 5.9 5.9 5.9
Money market rate (av; %) -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
Long-term interest rate (av; %) 6.0 4.2 2.6 1.3 0.9 3.2 3.7 3.9 3.9 3.9
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.7
Labour force (% change) -0.3 -0.6 -0.7 -2.3 0.2 -0.1 1.8 0.6 0.1 0.1
Employment (m) 3.7 3.8 3.9 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.1 4.1
Employment (% change) 2.4 2.2 1.8 -1.2 2.1 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
Unemployment (m) 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6
Unemployment rate (av; %) 21.8 19.8 17.9 17.6 14.8 13.7 14.4 14.0 13.3 12.5
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
Consumer prices (av; EU harmonised measure) 1.1 0.8 0.5 -1.3 0.6 7.0 2.8 2.1 1.5 1.5
Producer prices (av) 4.2 3.3 0.6 -4.6 11.9 28.6 2.1 1.5 2.5 2.8
GDP deflator (av) 0.2 -0.2 0.1 -0.6 1.8 2.2 1.7 0.2 1.1 1.5
Private consumption deflator (av) 0.2 0.1 0.2 -1.2 1.3 2.9 1.4 1.6 1.5 1.5
Government consumption deflator (av) 1.9 1.4 1.6 -0.2 -0.3 5.5 4.3 4.1 3.0 3.0
Fixed investment deflator (av) -1.2 0.6 0.3 -0.1 1.8 2.5 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
Average nominal wages 0.9 2.8 1.7 3.6 1.2 5.9 3.9 3.1 2.6 2.6
Average real wages -0.2 2.2 1.5 4.9 0.0 -1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
Unit labour costs (€-based; av) 1.8 c 3.0 c 1.2 c 11.6 c 0.0 c 2.3 1.3 0.5 0.2 0.2
Unit labour costs, business sector (US$) 3.8 c 7.7 c -4.1 c 13.8 c -1.3 c -5.1 5.4 5.1 3.1 1.4
Labour costs per hour (€) d 14.0 c 14.5 c 14.8 c 15.4 c 15.6 c 16.6 17.2 17.8 18.3 18.9
Labour costs per hour, manufacturing (US$) d 15.9 c 17.1 c 16.5 c 17.5 c 18.4 c 18.2 19.7 21.3 22.5 23.5
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates. d Includes pay for time worked, other direct pay (eg holiday pay), employer expenditure on legally required insurance programmes and other labour taxes.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -3.8 -6.2 -3.1 -12.5 -12.7 -12.1 -13.0 -14.1 -17.5 -19.7
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -1.9 -2.9 -1.5 -6.6 -5.9 -5.7 -5.6 -5.6 -6.5 -6.9
Goods: exports fob 31.7 38.2 36.3 33.0 46.3 52.7 51.1 54.6 58.8 63.6
Goods: imports fob -54.1 -64.8 -61.9 -54.1 -76.6 -87.2 -93.6 -102.5 -111.8 -120.9
Trade balance -22.4 -26.6 -25.6 -21.1 -30.3 -34.5 -42.5 -48.0 -52.9 -57.3
Services: credit 38.0 43.9 45.0 25.9 41.4 45.4 54.8 61.6 67.3 72.3
Services: debit -17.6 -21.1 -21.3 -17.6 -26.1 -27.3 -30.3 -33.4 -36.5 -39.4
Services balance 20.4 22.8 23.6 8.3 15.4 18.1 24.5 28.2 30.8 33.0
Primary income: credit 7.7 7.2 6.6 7.0 7.2 6.8 6.9 7.1 7.1 7.1
Primary income: debit -8.9 -9.2 -8.3 -7.4 -6.4 -6.0 -6.3 -6.6 -6.8 -6.9
Primary income balance -1.2 -2.0 -1.8 -0.3 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.2
Secondary income balance -0.6 -0.4 0.7 0.6 1.5 3.6 4.4 5.2 4.2 4.5
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 97.6 105.1 104.5 103.6 c 132.2 c 161.9 149.2 139.2 133.3 130.9
Export prices (% change) 1.7 17.4 -0.6 -0.8 c 27.6 c 22.5 -7.8 -6.7 -4.2 -1.8
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 96.9 103.4 106.5 95.0 c 114.0 c 130.2 126.3 123.5 122.7 122.4
Import prices (% change) 2.9 12.9 3.0 -10.8 c 20.0 c 14.2 -3.0 -2.2 -0.7 -0.3
Terms of trade (2010=100) 100.7 101.6 98.1 109.1 c 116.0 c 124.4 118.2 112.7 108.6 107.0
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 6.9 3.1 0.1 9.5 c 9.5 c 5.3 4.9 3.7 3.5 3.6
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment 3.4 4.0 5.0 3.3 6.0 6.9 7.6 8.0 8.4 8.8
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 1.7 1.9 2.4 1.7 2.8 3.2 3.3 3.2 3.1 3.1
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 14.7 17.0 23.0 15.0 21.6 23.8 22.7 19.8 17.8 16.6
Stock of foreign direct investment 38.2 39.8 49.0 47.4 51.4 58.3 65.8 73.8 82.2 90.9
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 3,617 3,784 4,674 4,552 4,955 5,649 6,417 7,230 8,090 8,999
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 19.1 18.8 23.9 25.1 23.8 27.4 28.4 29.4 30.6 32.1
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.17 1.03 0.48 0.33 0.54 0.56 0.59 0.60 0.60 0.61
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.13 0.12 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.16 0.17 0.18 0.19
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU.
Global data US and OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
Oil prices: dated Brent
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
Domestic data GDP growth and components: ELSTAT, National Accounts
Consumer prices: ELSTAT
Earnings index: ELSTAT
Foreign direct investment: IMF, IFS
Exchange rates: ECB, Eurostat
Treasury-bill rate: Bank of Greece; ELSTAT
Balance of payments: IMF
External trade: ELSTAT
Population: UN population data
Industrial production: OECD, Main Economic Indicators
Abbreviations ECB: European Central Bank
ELSTAT: Hellenic Statistical Authority
IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows the EIU to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by the EIU for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2017-21) and from EIU assessments for the forecast period (2022-26). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by the EIU for 2017-21. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2022-26 are based on EIU assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; the EIU, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2017-21 ranges are then used to derive 2022-26 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2022-26, not to the likely situation in 2026 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2019 or 2024). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2017-21   2022-26  
  Greece Regional average a Greece Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 4 4.6 4 4.4
  2. Risk of social unrest 2 4.1 3 3.8
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 5 4.8 5 4.8
  4. Government and opposition 4 4.2 4 4.0
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 3 4.1 4 4.0
  6. International disputes or tensions 3 3.9 3 2.9
  7. Government policy towards business 3 3.9 4 3.7
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 2 3.6 3 3.5
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 2 3.7 3 3.9
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 3 3.9 3 4.1
 11. Efficiency of legal system 3 3.8 3 3.9
 12. Corruption 3 3.9 3 4.0
 13. Impact of crime 3 4.2 4 4.2
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 5 4.9 5 4.9
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 3 3.8 4 3.9
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 1 2.8 1 2.8
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 5 4.5 4 3.8
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 3 4.4 2 4.3
  6. Quality of policymaking 2 3.7 4 4.1
  7. Institutional underpinnings 3 4.6 4 4.7
  8. Asset prices 2 2.3 3 2.7
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 3 4.0 4 4.2
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 4 4.9 5 5.0
  3. Real GDP growth* 1 1.9 3 2.9
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 2 3.7 2 3.7
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 2 1.8 4 2.3
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 3 1.8 3 2.4
  7. The natural resource endowment* 3 3.3 3 3.3
  8. Profitability* 2 2.2 4 3.1
  9. Regional integration 5 4.8 5 4.7
 10. Proximity to markets 4 4.7 3 4.2
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 3 4.7 4 4.8
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 3 3.8 4 4.0
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 4 3.9 4 4.0
  4. Promotion of competition 3 3.7 4 3.7
  5. Protection of intellectual property 3 4.5 4 4.6
  6. Price controls 4 4.1 4 4.0
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 2 3.3 3 3.4
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 3 3.7 3 3.6
  9. Minority shareholders 4 4.2 4 4.2
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 3 4.2 4 3.4
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 3 3.8 4 3.8
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 3 4.8 4 4.9
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 3 4.6 3 4.6
  5. Government favouritism 2 3.9 3 3.3
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 3 4.8 5 4.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 4 4.4 5 4.2
  3. Ease of trading* 3 4.6 4 4.1
  4. Openness of trade* 4 4.5 5 4.6
  5. Restrictions on the current account 4 4.9 5 5.0
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 4 4.3 5 4.6
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 3 2.7 3 2.9
  3. Value-added tax* 2 2.4 2 2.3
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 2 2.8 3 2.8
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 3 3.6 3 3.8
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 3 3.8 3 3.8
  7. Tax complexity 2 3.4 3 3.3
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 3 2.9 3 3.4
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 3 4.5 4 4.6
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 3 3.2 4 3.7
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 5 4.4 4 4.2
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 3 4.3 5 4.6
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 2 3.4 3 3.8
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 3 2.6 3 2.7
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 3 4.5 4 4.5
  3. Quality of workforce* 3 3.9 3 3.9
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 4 4.3 4 4.4
  5. Health of the workforce* 5 4.9 5 5.0
  6. Level of technical skills 3 4.2 4 4.1
  7. Cost of living* 5 3.1 5 3.3
  8. Incidence of strikes* 3 3.7 3 3.8
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 2 3.2 3 3.4
 10. Extent of wage regulation 4 3.4 3 3.3
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 3 3.8 4 3.7
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 4 4.2 5 4.6
  2. Broadband connection speed* 4 4.6 4 4.6
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 3 4.3 4 4.4
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 5 4.6 5 4.6
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 3 3.8 3 3.8
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 3 4.2 4 4.2
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 4 4.4 4 4.6
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 2 4.2 3 4.4
  9. Rents of office space* 3 1.7 3 1.6
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 3 4.4 3 4.2
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 4 4.7 4 4.8
  3. Scope of e-government* 4 4.3 5 4.6
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 5 4.5 3 4.1
  5. Internet use* 4 4.7 5 4.9
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 2 2.7 1 2.3
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 3 4.3 4 4.6
  8. Research infrastructure* 3 4.4 4 4.3
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

Subject: Tax rates; Sovereign debt; Foreign exchange rates; Labor force; Politics; Pandemics; Productivity; Consumption; Purchasing power parity; Population growth; Economic reform; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Older people; Democracy; Coronaviruses; Tourism; Households; COVID-19; Deficit financing

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Sovereign debt Foreign exchange rates Labor force Productivity Consumption Purchasing power parity Economic reform Gross Domestic Product--GDP Deficit financing

Location: Greece; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Greece; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Forecast Greece June 2022

Publication title: Country Forecast. Greece; New York

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science

ISSN: 0966954X

e-ISSN: 20489358

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2714191868

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-greece-june-2022/docview/2714191868/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Germany June 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-germany-june-2022/docview/2714191088/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Economic outlook 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 2.9 1.3 0.9 1.7 2.1 2.2 Consumer price inflation (av, %) 3.2 7.7 3.3 2.1 1.9 1.9 Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.7 -3.2 -1.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 7.5 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.5 3-month Treasury rate (av; %) -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5 Exchange rate €:US$ (av) 0.84 0.91 0.88 0.84 0.81 0.80 The German economy faces a variety of headwinds. Demographic outlook Population (m) 2016 2021 2026 Total 82.6 82.9 82.7 Male 40.7 41.0 – Female 41.9 41.9 – Period averages (%) 2017-21 2022-26 Population growth 0.1 0.0 Working-age population growth -0.4 – Labour force growth 0.1 -0.2 The pandemic in 2020-21 resulted in a higher death rate, lower net immigration and slightly fewer births than in 2019, meaning that there was no population growth in either year. Fact sheet Annual data 2021a Historical averages (%) 2017-21 Population (m) 82.9 Population growth 0.1 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 4,215.7 Real GDP growth 0.6 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 4,869.4 Real domestic demand growth 0.8 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 50,862 Inflation 1.7 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 58,749 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 7.6 Exchange rate (av) €:US$ 0.84 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 2.9 a Actual. Priorities include addressing inflation and supply-chain disruptions from the Russian invasion of Ukraine and Chinese coronavirus lockdowns; reorienting defence and security policy; managing the transition of the automotive sector towards lower-emission vehicles; building industrial sovereignty and increasing the resilience of supply chains; the rollout of fifth-generation (5G) technology and progress on the Industry 4.0 agenda; and transitioning the energy sector away from coal, nuclear power and Russian energy.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Germany&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Germany+June+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-15&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Germany&amp;rft.issn=09669388&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - Olaf Scholz, the leader of the centre-left Social Democratic Party (SPD), took over from the long-serving Angela Merkel as chancellor in December 2021, forming a three-party coalition with the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP) and The Greens. Germany has a strongly centrist and consensus-based political culture, and EIU expects the coalition to remain stable for its full term, to 2025. However, the FDP, which has generally positioned itself on the centre-right, is not closely aligned with the SPD or The Greens on economic, foreign, fiscal or environmental policy issues, creating the risk of greater friction than under previous governments. For the moment, the Russia-Ukraine war has created a cross-party consensus around increased energy security and defence spending that also includes the centre-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU).

Germany--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
8.14 8.22 13 7 7 3
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

- Germany's score in our business environment model rises from 8.14 in the historical period (2017-21) to 8.22 in the forecast period (2022-26). The country ranks seventh in the global ranking, and third among its 17 regional peers, behind Switzerland and Denmark. The improvements reflect effective mitigation of the shock from the pandemic; ongoing reform efforts; and the bounce-back from the 2020 slump. However, Germany is more exposed than most other large high-income economies to the near-term fallout (and energy risks) from the Russia-Ukraine war. Constraints on the ranking include a high tax burden on labour income and on firms, alongside high administrative costs. Key strengths of the business environment are political stability, a skilled labour force, openness to trade and investment, and a strong research and innovation framework.

Germany--highlights: Economic outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 2.9 1.3 0.9 1.7 2.1 2.2
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 3.2 7.7 3.3 2.1 1.9 1.9
Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.7 -3.2 -1.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 7.5 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.5
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
Exchange rate €:US$ (av) 0.84 0.91 0.88 0.84 0.81 0.80

- The German economy faces a variety of headwinds. Surging inflation is weighing on consumers' purchasing power and damaging business sentiment. External demand is slowing as the US begins its monetary tightening cycle and Chinese growth slows, and the war in Ukraine is disrupting German manufacturing activity-especially in the automotive sector-via higher commodity prices and disrupted supply chains. We expect a technical recession in the short term, with a much deeper recession should Russia completely cut off gas inflows. Economic conditions will normalise only in 2024. A poor demographic outlook will increasingly constrain growth; policy priorities for the medium term include boosting green and digital investment.

Germany--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2016 2021 2026
Total 82.6 82.9 82.7
 Male 40.7 41.0 –
 Female 41.9 41.9 –
Period averages (%)   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth   0.1 0.0
Working-age population growth   -0.4 –
Labour force growth   0.1 -0.2

- The pandemic in 2020-21 resulted in a higher death rate, lower net immigration and slightly fewer births than in 2019, meaning that there was no population growth in either year. We forecast that the population will increase marginally in 2022 as net immigration is boosted by the arrival of Ukrainian refugees (780,000, according to UN data from June), before moving towards a longer-term trend of decline. As elsewhere in Europe, the population is ageing, with the old-age dependency ratio expected to rise throughout the forecast period and the working-age population already in decline, putting pressure on pension and healthcare costs.

Germany--highlights: Market opportunities   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 4,216 4,283 4,686 5,061 5,373 5,628
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 50,862 51,676 56,557 61,120 64,928 68,052
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 2,411 2,355 2,540 2,724 2,879 2,991
Household consumption (US$ bn) 2,088 2,144 2,318 2,500 2,651 2,760
Household consumption per head (US$) 25,190 25,860 27,980 30,190 32,030 33,370

- Germany will remain the world's fourth-largest economy at market exchange rates in 2026, and the biggest EU economy. It is the largest consumer market in Europe by population, but demand is constrained by a substantial tax wedge and high savings rates. In 2022 we expect retail demand to slow as inflation rises, but growth will be seen in the hospitality, travel, entertainment and personal care sectors as spending patterns normalise after two years of pandemic restrictions. A shift towards e-commerce will be sustained. Over the longer term the changing age profile will do much to shape demand.

Germany--highlights: Long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 1.6 1.5 1.6
Growth of real GDP 1.6 1.3 1.4
Labour productivity growth 1.7 1.6 1.7

- Our forecast for the economy's long-term average annual growth rate is 1.4%, slowing from 1.6% in 2022-30 to 1.3% in 2031-50. The poor demographic outlook is the main driver of this weakening overall growth rate, as total factor productivity will remain supportive of growth, as will capital spending. The picture looks slightly more favourable on a per-head basis. Germany has many attributes that are conducive to sustainable long-term growth, including a highly skilled workforce, stable institutions and openness to innovation. Its openness to trade will ensure continued efforts to protect the multilateral trading system, but trade ties with Russia and China will decline given geopolitical tensions.

Fact sheet Annual data 2021 a Historical averages (%) 2017-21
Population (m) 82.9 Population growth 0.1
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 4,215.7 Real GDP growth 0.6
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 4,869.4 Real domestic demand growth 0.8
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 50,862 Inflation 1.7
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 58,749 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 7.6
Exchange rate (av) €:US$ 0.84 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 2.9
a Actual.
Background: The modern German state was founded in 1870. After the second world war (1939-45) Germany was divided into two parts: a liberal parliamentary democracy in the west and a totalitarian communist regime in the east. On October 3rd 1990, after the end of the Soviet Union's hegemony in central and eastern Europe, Germany was reunified.
Political structure: Germany is a federation of 16 states, or Länder, each of which has its own constitution, government and parliament. The states are primarily responsible for policing and education. The federal parliament comprises the directly elected Bundestag (the lower house) and the Bundesrat (the upper house) of representatives of the state governments. The federal chancellor, the head of the executive, is elected by the Bundestag and can be removed only by the election of a successor. Federal coalitions are typically made up of two parties, but voter fragmentation was such in the 2021 election that the incoming government is the first three-party coalition at the federal level.
Policy issues: Priorities include addressing inflation and supply-chain disruptions from the Russian invasion of Ukraine and Chinese coronavirus lockdowns; reorienting defence and security policy; managing the transition of the automotive sector towards lower-emission vehicles; building industrial sovereignty and increasing the resilience of supply chains; the rollout of fifth-generation (5G) technology and progress on the Industry 4.0 agenda; and transitioning the energy sector away from coal, nuclear power and Russian energy. Investment spending will increase in the forecast period (2022-26).
Taxation: The federal corporation tax rate was cut from 25% to 15% in 2008. The effective corporate tax rate, including a municipal trade tax and a solidarity tax, is about 30-33%. The solidarity tax was phased out for most income bands from 2021. The top marginal personal income tax rate is 45%. Social security contributions are shared equally between employers and employees. The main value-added tax (VAT) rate is 19%, but was temporarily reduced to 16% in the second half of 2020.
Foreign trade: The goods trade surplus came to US$228bn in 2021, with export earnings at US$1.6trn and import costs at US$1.4trn. Germany's single largest goods export market is still the EU, but the country has been more successful than most in diversifying its markets and selling into fast-growing emerging markets over the past decade.
Major exports 2021 % of total Major imports 2021 % of total
Machinery & transport equipment 46.2 Machinery & transport equipment 36.1
Chemicals & related products 18.7 Chemicals & related products 15.1
Food, drinks & tobacco 5.2 Mineral fuels, lubricants & related materials 9.0
Mineral fuels, lubricants & related materials 2.8 Food, drinks & tobacco 7.1
       
Leading markets 2021 % of total Leading suppliers 2021 % of total
US 9.0 Netherlands 14.7
China 7.7 China 8.2
France 7.5 Poland 6.6
Netherlands 7.3 Belgium 6.3
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance Germany is a federal democracy, with major powers delegated to the 16 states (Länder). The 2021 election marked a turning point for the political landscape as Angela Merkel stood down after 16 years as chancellor. Her party, the centre-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and its Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), performed poorly in the election, enabling the centre-left Social Democratic Party (SPD) to lead the next government. However, with these two big-tent parties having seen a sharp decline in their vote share in recent elections, as voter preferences have fragmented and previously solid electoral blocs (such as the blue-collar vote) have dispersed, three parties were needed to reach a majority at the federal level rather than two, for the first time. The SPD therefore governs with the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP) and The Greens, which saw a notable surge in their support, especially among young voters. Geographically, the SPD performed best in the north and the CDU/CSU in the south, with The Greens winning in larger urban areas. The far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) and far-left Left Party are now only represented in the former east Germany, with both losing vote share compared with 2017 as voters reverted to the mainstream, centrist parties. The bicameral parliament comprises the Bundestag (the lower house of parliament), whose members are elected on a system of modified proportional representation, and the Bundesrat (the upper house), which consists of representatives of the 16 state governments. The coalition has a majority in the Bundestag, but not in the Bundesrat.
Bundestag election results
  % share of vote         No. of seats
  2005 2009 2013 2017 2021 2021
Christian Democratic Union (CDU)/Christian Social Union (CSU) 35.2 33.8 41.5 32.9 24.1 197
Social Democratic Party (SPD) 34.2 23.0 25.7 20.5 25.7 206
Left Party a 8.7 11.9 8.6 9.2 4.9 39
The Greens 8.1 10.7 8.4 8.9 14.8 118
Free Democratic Party (FDP) 9.8 14.6 4.8 10.7 11.5 92
Alternative for Germany (AfD) — — 4.7 12.6 10.3 83
Others 4.0 6.0 6.3 5.0 8.7 1
Total 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 736
a Before the 2005 election, the Party of Democratic Socialist (PDS) merged with a new group, the Election Alliance for Jobs and Social Justice (WASG). The joint party was named the Left Party. Before 2005 the results relate to the PDS alone.
Sources: Federal Election Officer; Bundestag website.
Political outlook: Political stability Olaf Scholz, of the centre-left Social Democratic Party (SPD), succeeded the long-serving Angela Merkel as chancellor in December 2021, after his party reached a coalition agreement with the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP) and The Greens. The government was formed with relative ease following the September federal election, given that it is fairly ideologically diverse, but finding a lasting agreement between three parties with different perspectives, notably on fiscal policy, will not be easy. In the near term the Russian invasion of Ukraine-which has led to a reorientation in German security policy-and a still-weak economy, exacerbated by supply-chain disruptions and spiking commodity prices, pose significant challenges.
Germany has a strongly centrist and consensus-based political culture, and EIU expects the coalition to remain stable throughout the parliament, whose term will end by October 2025. However, the FDP, which has generally positioned itself on the centre-right, is not closely aligned with the SPD and The Greens on economic, foreign, fiscal and environmental policy issues, creating the risk of greater frictions than under previous governments. The Russian invasion of Ukraine has led to significant policy shifts from all of the coalition partners, with the centre-left SPD and Greens countenancing a massive increase in defence spending, while the fiscally conservative FDP has acquiesced to continued deficit spending. The invasion has created a cross-party consensus around increased energy security and defence spending that also includes the centre-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU). However, this unity is likely to fray as other issues return to the fore.
In addition to managing the Ukraine situation, the coalition has stressed the theme of modernisation throughout its programmes. Several changes on social questions are proposed-liberalisation of abortion law; easier work permissions for asylum-seekers and the creation of more legal routes for migrants to enter Germany; and some legalisation of the recreational use of cannabis. The new government will also seek to reduce the voting age to 16 (although for federal elections this will require the agreement of the Bundesrat, the upper house representing the 16 federal states, where the coalition lacks a majority), as well as the introduction of some "citizens' juries" into decision-making in the federal parliament.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness The quality of administration is high, and the implementation of policies that have been passed by parliament is sound. The federal structure of the government means that considerable responsibility falls on the 16 states that constitute the republic. An advantage of this is that many issues are decided with the closer democratic involvement of the electorate. States have a strong incentive to improve their own quality of governance, as comparisons with other states are easy to make, although one drawback is that the quality of public services such as education remains heterogeneous across states. Another disadvantage is that co-ordination can be difficult in policy areas in which the states have a large role. This has been the case in recent years. For instance, although the federal government had allocated additional funds for infrastructure investment, lower governments were often unable to use these for additional investment owing to capacity constraints. More recently, the coronavirus pandemic elicited different responses in different states, and caused a rise in tensions between the federal government (which was pushing for stricter restrictions) and state-level authorities (attuned to local business needs).
The design of the system also means that the constitutional powers enjoyed by the Bundesrat may, on occasion, limit the ability of the federal government to push through reforms in the face of opposition at state level (state interests are represented in the Bundesrat). However, the upper house does not have the right of veto on all aspects of legislation, and the proportion of laws requiring its approval was reduced in 2006. In exchange for this loss of influence over federal legislation, the states gained greater influence over the implementation of federal laws and some additional powers, particularly in education.
Thorough coalition agreements tend to support smooth policymaking Majority coalitions are the norm in Germany at both the federal and the state levels. This generally ensures smooth policymaking, as the coalition agreement usually sets out in advance what the government will be working on throughout its term (although of course not everything can be anticipated in advance). In the case of the current three-party federal coalition, reaching this agreement involved 22 working groups, bringing together 300 politicians, and resulted in workable compromises and key wins for each of the parties. The consensus-oriented political culture is proving increasingly important for political stability, as state governments now bring together three parties more commonly than two, requiring lengthier negotiations and more goodwill among party leaders.
Political outlook: Election watch The fragmentation of voter preferences seen across Europe in recent decades is also visible in Germany. Previously, federal governments had always been formed with two parties, even as regional governments were forced to experiment with three-party administrations. In the 2021 election the SPD and CDU, Germany's two big-tent parties, both recorded their worst results in the post-war era, with close to a quarter of the vote each. The Greens and FDP gained vote share, reflecting strong support from younger voters, whereas the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) and the Left Party lost vote share, with their support mostly collapsing outside the former East Germany.
Four state elections will be held in 2022, the results of which will predominantly reflect local dynamics. Saarland voted on March 27th, with the SPD winning a majority. Schleswig-Holstein voted on May 8th and North Rhine-Westphalia on May 15th; both resulted in expanded wins by the CDU at the expense of the SPD. The election for Lower Saxony, currently governed by an SPD/CDU coalition will be held on October 9th. At the federal level, the SPD and the FDP have both seen their support decline since the beginning of the war in Ukraine as dissatisfaction with Mr Scholz's handling of the crisis grows. This support has moved instead to The Greens and the CDU/Christian Social Union (CSU), both of which now poll above the SPD.
Political outlook: International relations The EU response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine has been unprecedented and closely co-ordinated with the US and other Western allies. The EU had previously adopted a cautious approach to sanctioning Russia. Trade ties between Russia and the EU made European policymakers (especially in Germany and Italy) reluctant to impose stringent measures on Russia.
The invasion of Ukraine has prompted a realignment in German foreign and security policy. This is most evident in Mr Scholz's commitment to increase Germany's defence spending to meet the NATO spending target of 2% of GDP (up from 1.4% in 2020), with this commitment now set to be included in the German constitution. Despite this, Mr Scholz has come under sustained criticism for his handling of Ukraine both domestically and internationally. Germany has committed to exporting 500 Stinger missiles and 1,000 anti-tank weapons to Ukraine, but the government has been slow to deliver these provisions and has wavered on providing heavy weapons such as tanks and artillery. Mr Scholz has attempted to tread a cautious line, wary of any escalation that could lead to a Russian gas cut-off, but this has put him at odds with more hawkish NATO allies such as the US, as well as with Ukraine.
The EU is taking steps to mitigate the impact of the conflict on EU consumers and businesses. As during the covid-19 pandemic, the EU has relaxed state aid rules to help companies that are facing a sharp increase in input prices. The EU's fiscal rules have been suspended for another year, until 2024, to give member states more flexibility as they respond to the crisis. In addition, EU member states have agreed on a temporary mechanism for Ukrainian refugees.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
Overall position 8.14 8.22 13 7 7 3
Political environment 8.8 8.8 8 6 6 4
 Political stability 9.3 8.5 5 5 4 3
 Political effectiveness 8.4 9.0 10 4 6 2
Macroeconomic environment 8.3 7.8 9 16 6 6
Market opportunities 6.8 7.6 9 5 3 1
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 8.3 8.3 12 12 6 6
Policy towards foreign investment 8.7 7.8 10 15 8 7
Foreign trade & exchange controls 10.0 9.6 1 5 1 1
Taxes 7.1 7.1 23 28 6 7
Financing 8.1 9.3 9 1 3 1
The labour market 7.0 7.0 18 22 8 8
Infrastructure 7.8 8.3 16 13 10 9
Technological readiness 8.9 9.2 11 4 6 2
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Germany's business environment ranks third in western Europe in 2022-26 Germany's score in EIU's business environment model rises from 8.14 in the historical period (2017-21) to 8.22 in the forecast period (2022-26). The country climbs six places to seventh in the global ranking, and ranks third among its 17 regional peers, behind Switzerland and Denmark. The improvements largely reflect three factors: Germany's strong institutional framework and solid macroeconomic fundamentals, which helped to mitigate the shock from the pandemic; ongoing reform efforts aimed at strengthening network infrastructure, the financing environment and the economy's technological capacity; and a bounce-back in some economic indicators from the 2020 slump. However, Germany is more exposed than most other large high-income economies to the near-term fallout (and energy risks) from the Russia-Ukraine war, given supply-side disruption to its large export sector and a high reliance on Russian gas.
Germany's main strengths are its skilled labour force, stable political culture, openness to foreign trade and investment, established supply-chain links, and world-class research and innovation. It has strong legal and regulatory structures, efficient public administration and a broadly pro-business policy orientation. The financing environment is resilient, but elevated inflation, rising interest rates and economic strains from the war will constrain lending. Germany's large and competitive manufacturing sector is another advantage, but trading conditions will be challenging, given global geopolitical tensions and supply-chain disruptions. Sentiment towards greenfield foreign investment will remain broadly favourable, but tighter screening rules and a focus on "protecting" national sovereignty lower the score for policy towards foreign investment. Network infrastructure is extensive, but ageing in some areas and its quality lags that of regional peers; improvements will be gradual. The tax regime places a heavy burden on labour income, and the demographic outlook is poor.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Germany's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: State involvement continues in the financial sector, railways and telecommunications. Intervention often pushes green and digital goals. Russia-Ukraine war could trigger heightened role in energy sector. EU state aid rules still relaxed.
2024-26: Limited prospects for reforming regulated service professions. Trend towards industrial sovereignty continues.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Government generally welcomes foreign direct investment, but Germany lobbied strongly to tighten EU-wide screening rules of non-EU capital, and takeovers of German companies now meet political resistance.
2024-26: Investment from China is increasingly unwelcome, amid concerns about intellectual property leakage.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: Post-pandemic bounce-back of German export sector remains constrained by supply-chain disruptions, especially for semiconductors. Sanctions on Russian imports. Worsening EU-China relations and risk of deteriorating UK-EU relations.
2024-26: EU makes further gradual progress on bilateral trade deals. US-China trade tensions become entrenched.
Taxes 2022-23: No major changes to headline tax rates. Modest adjustments aimed at mitigating the energy-price shock, lowering high labour tax wedge and incentivising "green" investments and clean-energy use. OECD develops global digital tax plan.
2024-26: Comparatively high labour tax burden persists. Research and development (R&D) tax incentive applies until 2026.
Financing 2022-23: Financing environment for firms is resilient, supported by the national development bank. Gradual tightening of global financial conditions, but European monetary policy remains fairly accommodative given the subdued growth outlook.
2024-26: Gradual expansion of alternative financing channels. Weak banking sector profitability remains an issue.
The labour market 2022-23: Unemployment falls as economy recovers from the pandemic. Sector-specific skills mismatches intensify.
2024-26: Limited prospects for reform to address structural challenges arising from ageing demographic and increasing share of migrant workers. Increased provision of childcare facilities supports moderate rise in female participation.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Investment in healthcare infrastructure, the transport network and digital access. Energy transition focuses on national hydrogen strategy, power grid improvement and new liquefied natural gas terminals to reduce exposure to Russia.
2024-26: New policy measures to meet medium-term emissions targets and further reduce reliance on Russian energy.
Technological readiness 2022-23: Government prioritises e-public services, firms' digital adoption, automotive innovation and workforce digital skills.
2024-26: Efforts continue on Industry 4.0, which focuses on upgrading manufacturing through automation and connected systems. Increasing threat from cybercrime and cyber-espionage. 5G network rollout supports wider digitalisation drive.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
8.3 7.8 9 16 6 6
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Germany has strong macroeconomic fundamentals, with a high employment rate, a track record of staunch fiscal management and modest inflation, a sophisticated and competitive export-focused industrial sector, an external surplus, moderate private-sector debt (by regional standards), and a robust Macroeconomic environment 12 Germany Country Forecast June 2022 www.eiu.com © The Economist Intelligence Unit Limited 2022 institutional framework. Weaker aspects include poor trends in investment and infrastructure spending (partly due to protracted fiscal restraint), a falling workingage population, high dependence on energy imports (especially from Russia) and growing imbalances in the real estate sector.
Germany is highly exposed to the spill-over effects of the Russia-Ukraine war The Russia-Ukraine conflict has heightened existing inflationary pressures and supply-side frictions caused by the covid-19 pandemic, and raised risks to energy security. After a less severe downturn than most peer countries in 2020-amid extensive policy support and structural advantages-Germany's recovery has since lagged the regional average and trailed far behind that of the US. This mainly reflects the high degree of exposure to heavily disrupted global trading conditions and the volatile geopolitical environment, particularly around Germany's exposure to Russian energy exports. These disruptions have already begun to foster moves towards localised supply chains-including in the large automotive sector-and greater state-led investment in transport, digital and green energy infrastructure, with accelerated efforts to reduce dependence on Russian gas. The scale of most initiatives implies only gradual progress over the forecast period, amid tighter financing conditions and labour-supply pressures. A sudden and prolonged stoppage of significant inflows of Russian gas would trigger a deep recession and probable energy rationing for businesses.
Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
8.3 8.3 12 12 6 6
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Germany will continue to offer an attractive environment for private enterprise, albeit with more restricted services competition and more complex sectoral regulation than in some peer countries. The category score and regional ranking remain unchanged in the forecast period. Increased state involvement in the economy in response to the pandemic and the Russia-Ukraine war will not be fully reversed, but is still comparatively modest in the regional context. Private enterprise is supported by a robust institutional structure, a stable legal code, strong research and innovation capacity, and an extensive network of global and regional supply chains. The competition authority, the Federal Cartel Office, is reasonably efficient. The regulatory framework for companies can be complex and costly, but is robust and generally transparent. Administrative processes for accessing utilities and credit, obtaining permits, enforcing contracts and resolving insolvency are straightforward. However, the number of procedures and costs involved to establish a new business and hire labour are above the OECD average, and there are high barriers to competition in certain transport, utilities, retail and business services sectors. Tax administration can be burdensome, but online registration and value-added tax (VAT) filing has improved since the introduction of an EU One-Stop-Shop e-commerce scheme in late 2021.

- The pandemic triggered a sharp rise in government support for the travel and hospitality sectors. Recipients of state aid included Deutsche Bahn; Lufthansa, Germany's largest airline; and TUI, a travel group. Most forms of pandemic-related direct financial assistance have expired, but indirect liquidity support will continue. Surging energy costs and supply-side disruption from the Russia-Ukraine war have led to new targeted measures in the form of income support, business subsidies (particularly for energy-intensive industries) and temporary tax relief. There will be a higher level of state involvement in the energy sector over the forecast period, amid efforts to reduce dependence on Russia, and as part of longer-term "green transition" climate policies. A sudden and lengthy halt to inflows of Russian gas would probably trigger major state intervention via financial support, price controls and possible energy rationing.

The influence of the KfW in supporting financing has risen since the pandemic
- The state will retain a significant role in the financing of firms and investments, primarily via the state-owned KfW (the largest national development bank in Europe) and a broad framework of public-sector savings banks, which are mostly owned by local authorities and geared towards small businesses. The influence of the KfW in supporting private-sector financing has expanded since the pandemic, and it will have a prominent role over the forecast period in supporting government plans for increased capital investment in digital and energy infrastructure. This will mainly be via off-balance sheet bodies, with a view to attracting and scaling up private-sector funding.
- There is a moderate level of state ownership in the economy. The federal government's major holdings include the national railway operator, Deutsche Bahn (100%); the former telecommunications monopoly, Deutsche Telekom (32%); the former postal monopoly, Deutsche Post (21%); and the country's second-largest financial institution, Commerzbank (16%). The liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP), which holds the Ministry of Finance, campaigned on a platform of reducing state ownership, but given political differences within the three-party coalition and the uncertain economic outlook we do not expect sell-offs of high-profile state-owned stakes in the near to medium term.
- In 2019 the previous government published the National Industrial Strategy 2030. Alongside objectives to boost innovation and competitiveness, there was a strong implied shift towards greater state intervention in industry sectors and support for "national and regional champions" and "strategically important" domestic firms. This was a response to growing domestic and EU concerns over market access of state-supported foreign companies and related issues of intellectual property and cyber-security. The pandemic and the Russia-Ukraine conflict are reinforcing this policy trend towards industrial sovereignty.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
8.7 7.8 10 15 8 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Policy towards foreign direct investment (FDI) will remain fairly liberal (as in most EU countries), but FDI screening procedures have been tightened steadily in recent years amid hardened political sentiment towards capital inflows in "strategic" sectors. This is reflected in a fall in the country's score and global ranking, with prospective investors facing a more interventionist FDI framework and more complex regulatory processes. Nonetheless, the regional ranking improves slightly, given similar measures elsewhere. Germany has attracted considerable inbound investment over recent decades, primarily from Europe, the US and Japan. On the whole, foreign and domestic investors are treated equally in terms of investment incentives (with a focus on support for research and innovation) and protection of real and intellectual property. Germany Trade and Invest (GTAI) is the federal body responsible for FDI, with the state-owned development bank, KfW, the main provider of financing support. Limitations on foreign control traditionally applied only to "sensitive" sectors such as media, defence and some critical infrastructure. However, the tighter FDI screening provisions now apply to a wider range of sectors. Restrictions on hostile takeovers are considerable, whether the acquirer is foreign or domestic; notice of strategic goals and "acting in concert" is mandatory for large investments.
FDI screening has increased in recent years
- Germany was a strong advocate of a new EU-wide framework for tighter screening of non-EU FDI-implemented in October 2020-and in recent years has progressively strengthened the country's investment screening rules. This follows a period of increased Chinese (and other foreign) acquisitions of German firms, which has raised concerns over the involvement of state-backed foreign actors in infrastructure assets and the transfer of technological knowledge and intellectual property. Historically, the government had the power to review (and potentially veto) new investment projects or acquisitions of equity stakes above 25% in German companies by non-EU investors if the transactions were deemed to pose a risk to national security. New regulations since 2019 have lowered this threshold to 10-20% for investments in "critical infrastructure" or "sensitive technologies", significantly expanded the range of sectors that these encompass (to include many areas of energy, telecommunications, transport, healthcare, finance and information technology) and also broadened the interpretation of "national security risk" to cover the potential impact on all EU member states. An amendment in mid-2021 extended the rules to cover FDI activity relating to artificial intelligence, biotechnology, robotics, semiconductors, food security and raw material extraction. The number of official investment reviews in 2021 is estimated to have been triple the level in 2018, with Brexit also contributing.
- One global trend in recent years has been an increasing share of FDI activity reflecting "corporate reconfigurations"-changes in multinational ownership structures-that have a minimal impact on output, employment and capital in the host economy. We expect this to continue over the forecast period.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
10.0 9.6 1 5 1 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The high score in this category reflects Germany's traditional openness to international commerce, the importance to the economy of foreign trade and membership of the EU, which provides for freedom of movement of goods, services, capital and persons within the bloc. The slight fall in the score and rankings reflects Germany's exposure to an expected deterioration in global trading conditions, in the context of heightened geopolitical risk, tightened FDI screening and tensions with China. No tariffs or quotas are permitted within the EU, and most other non-tariff restrictions have been abolished. The EU trades with Norway and Iceland under the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), has a range of bilateral agreements with Switzerland, a customs union with Turkey and a limited free-trade agreement (FTA) with the UK. Agriculture is excluded from these arrangements. Trade with other non-EU countries is mostly subject to moderate customs duties. Varied bilateral and regional agreements provide for lower or zero tariffs and co-operation on non-tariff barriers.
Supply-chain disruptions will remain substantial in 2022-23
- We expect a moderation in goods trade growth in 2022 as consumption swings back towards services. The Russia-Ukraine war has added disruption to global commodity markets and international supply chains (which have also been affected by China's zero-covid policy, likely to stay in place until 2023). Export-oriented businesses will be negatively affected to varying degrees by increased logistical friction, higher transport costs, higher energy and raw materials prices, and scarcity of some inputs. A significant downside risk for the German economy is a complete cut-off of Russian gas, on which it remains highly reliant. Russia is also an important source of iron and steel, non-ferrous metals, wood, copper, rubber, fertiliser and aluminium, with Ukraine being a leading source of animal products and electrical parts for vehicle engines.

EU-China tensions have been worsened by the Russia-Ukraine war
- China's stance on the Russia-Ukraine war has worsened its reputation with the EU and further undermined its multi-year diplomatic strategy to deepen relations with the bloc. EU-China tensions have risen in recent years, fuelled by disputes over unfair competition, concerns over strategic sectors and human rights issues. A revised EU industrial strategy in May 2021 included plans to reduce dependence on China and other foreign suppliers in areas such as technology products and pharmaceuticals. We expect a further deterioration in EU-China diplomatic ties in 2022-23. Trade will continue, but the operating environment for firms will worsen, particularly amid the compliance burden of heightened sanctions. The EU-China Comprehensive Agreement on Investment (CAI) is unlikely to be ratified in our forecast period to 2026.
- In recent years the EU has finalised FTAs with Canada, Singapore, Vietnam, Japan and the UK, upgraded its deal with Mexico, and launched trade talks with Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand. We expect the EU to make gradual progress on bilateral trade deals over the forecast period. The current limited scope of the EU-UK Trade and Co-operation Agreement (TCA), especially in services trade, will slowly expand and evolve. However, EU-UK tensions will persist, complicated by issues over Northern Ireland and broad mistrust in the EU of the current UK government, whose negotiating stance will remain primarily driven by short-term domestic political interests.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
7.1 7.1 23 28 6 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The tax regime remains one of the weaker areas of Germany's business environment and, with only minor changes expected over the forecast period, the country falls back in the global and regional rankings. Complexity will remain an issue, with taxes levied at the federal, state and municipal level. The tax/GDP ratio has risen gradually in recent years and was 41.5% in 2020 (latest comparable Eurostat data), close to the euro zone average. Taken together, direct taxes on personal income and net social security contributions (labour taxes) account for a higher than average share of tax receipts. A progressive income-tax system levies rates ranging from 14% to 42% on taxable income between EUR9,985 and EUR58,596 (in 2022). The 42% rate then applies to income up to EUR277,825, above which there is a 45% top rate. An additional "solidarity surcharge"-a 5.5% levy on income to finance reunification costs-was abolished for most taxpayers in 2021, with a tapered scale for higher earners. Most employees pay social security contributions into insurance funds covering pensions, healthcare, unemployment and long-term care. Contribution rates range from 18.6% of gross salary (split equally between employees and employer) for pensions to about 3% for long-term care and unemployment insurance. The standard VAT rate is 19%, slightly less than the EU average, with a reduced rate of 7% on certain goods and services.
Tax burden will remain high on labour income and companies
- The tax system places a high tax burden on labour income and companies. In 2021 the average single worker faced a "tax wedge" of 48.1%, the second highest in the OECD. Those with children have a lower, but still above-average, tax wedge. This high burden particularly affects low-income workers, and acts as a disincentive for second earners, contributing to Germany's modest full-time employment rate for women. The effective tax burden for companies is also elevated, despite a comparatively low headline federal corporation tax rate of 15%. Including a local trade tax (Gewerbesteuer) and other levies, the effective average corporation tax rate is about 30%, versus an EU average of about 21%. Tax incentives are rare, but a EUR1m annual allowance for certain research and development (R&D) activities was introduced in 2020 and will apply until 2026. Taxes for companies will remain complex, contributing to high compliance costs and favouring debt over equity, constraining the venture-capital market.
- Given the uncertain near-term outlook, the weaker state of the public finances and a coalition agreement (pushed by the FDP) not to raise headline tax rates, near-term reform measures will be modest. The focus will be on targeted measures to ease the energy-price shock (fuel taxes were temporarily cut in April 2022) and support longer-term climate policies by encouraging green investment. A new carbon pricing system was introduced in 2021, alongside tax-related "carrot and stick" measures (such as amended subsidies for electric vehicles) aimed at influencing transport use and energy efficiency. The carbon tax was raised slightly in 2022, with an offsetting reduction (for households) in the renewable energy levy. Non-energy excise taxes will continue to rise.
- Other tax plans under the new government include a tightening of rules covering the real estate transfer tax (RETT), measures to combat tax fraud and evasion (following on from the implementation in mid-2021 of the EU's Anti-Tax Avoidance Directive-ATAD), and ongoing digitalisation of the tax administration. Germany is supportive of OECD-driven efforts to establish global rules for corporate taxation, including digital levies on the US technology giants.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
8.1 9.3 9 1 3 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The financing environment in Germany is supported by a resilient and competitive banking sector, the prominent role of the KfW (the largest national development bank in Europe) and state-backed initiatives aimed at strengthening financing channels for start-ups and smaller firms (from a modest base). The rise in the score reflects the winding-down of emergency pandemic-support measures, reducing financial sector distortions. The fallout from the Russia-Ukraine war and a global shift towards tighter monetary policy means less-attractive financial conditions. However, stress tests indicate that Germany's financial sector will cope well, given solid capital and liquidity buffers, the stabilising effects of policy intervention and restructuring over the past decade. The German banking sector has little direct exposure to Russia and Ukraine, and indirect linkages do not present risks to financial stability. Vulnerabilities mainly stem from low profitability (among the weakest in the EU), subdued revenue growth and elevated operating costs. The banking system has a three-tiered structure, with large private commercial banks (the two biggest are Deutsche Bank and Commerzbank) and the state-owned regional lenders (Landesbanken) operating alongside an extensive network of local credit co-operatives and public-sector savings banks (owned by local authorities) that primarily service the Mittelstand (small and medium-sized enterprises, SMEs). Alongside the KfW, this offers a range of financing options for business, but contributes to strong downward pressure on banking margins. Internally generated funds account for an above-average share of corporate financing in Germany, reflecting firms' low reliance on capital markets. Bank credit is the preferred SME funding channel, being fairly cheap and available at long maturities. Venture capital markets have expanded, but are less developed than in most large high-income countries.
The banking sector faces a challenging environment in the short term
- Gradually rising market interest rates, spillover effects from the Russia-Ukraine war, the winding-down of pandemic support measures, a likely rise in loan defaults amid worsening macroeconomic conditions, subdued capital markets and heightened uncertainty point to a challenging environment for the banking sector and a period of softer lending activity. Net interest income will be bolstered by higher rates. In the event of Russia halting gas imports to Germany policymakers would respond with large-scale liquidity-support measures, but this would only partly mitigate the hit to balance sheets and broader sentiment.
- Imbalances in the German real estate sector gradually increased over the historical period, in the context of rising investor activity, low borrowing costs, constrained supply and pandemic-driven changes in housing demand. Real estate prices have risen strongly, particularly in major cities, where prices in some segments appear increasingly misaligned from fundamentals. The banking sector is not overly exposed to the housing market, but the central bank has raised concerns over a loosening of credit standards, given strong recent mortgage lending growth and rising interest rates. Stricter bank capital buffer rules linked to domestic residential housing loans will be phased in over 2022-23 and a modest tightening of macroprudential measures for borrowers is likely.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
7.0 7.0 18 22 8 8
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
A well-performing labour market, but demographic challenges lie ahead Germany's labour market boasts a skilled and productive workforce, low unemployment, established employer-employee relations, a reasonable trend of nominal earnings growth, a statutory national minimum wage (which will rise sharply in 2022) and an established framework of vocational training and apprenticeships. Solid labour market indicators before the pandemic, and a resilient performance since 2020, can be traced in part to liberalising reforms implemented by previous governments. However, some aspects hold down the score. Participation of women in full-time employment is modest, constrained by limited childcare availability (despite reforms since 2017) and tax disincentives for second earners. There is a large gap between employment rates of female EU and non-EU nationals (more so than for men), implying transition issues into the labour market for those with a migrant background. Across the economy as a whole, the share of low-skill, low-wage employment has risen steadily over the past decade. Digital workforce skills are above the regional average, but there is a lack of information and communication technology (ICT) specialists. Employment prospects (and the participation rate) of older workers have improved amid reforms, but Germany's declining working-age population implies ongoing labour-supply challenges.
The labour force is set to contract owing to poor demographic trends
- Germany's short-time work scheme (Kurzarbeit) played an important role in shielding the labour market during the pandemic (many countries implemented similar wage-subsidy programmes), limiting job losses and allowing companies to retain workers with firm-specific skills, mitigating the costs associated with lay-offs and future hiring and training. However, the labour force still contracted, with the disproportionate impact of the pandemic on certain sectors and groups (such as younger workers, the lower skilled and women) reinforcing some of the structural weaknesses in the labour market. There will need to be a strong policy focus over the forecast period on increasing labour participation to counter demographic trends and existing labour market inequalities. The new government has outlined plans to ease immigration rules and support flexible work-time schemes, and a likely influx of immigrants from the conflict in Ukraine will provide a moderate boost to the labour supply. However, with no changes expected to the statutory retirement age, rises in participation will be limited and skills shortages will intensify.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
7.8 8.3 16 13 10 9
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Infrastructure quality has long been a strength of the business environment, but a period of subdued capital investment has resulted in a gradual deterioration, constraining progress in digitalisation and raising capacity concerns in the energy transition policy (Energiewende) towards renewables. We expect improvements over the forecast period, with upgraded public investment plans (supported by EU grants under the bloc's recovery and resilience facility-RRF) targeted towards digital connectivity and skills, decarbonisation, hydrogen technology, the electric vehicle (EV) sector and a ten-year rail network modernisation programme. However, the large scale and disruptive impact of the green and digital transitions imply only a gradual pace of change, with progress also likely to be constrained by supply-chain frictions, higher energy costs, regulatory hurdles such as complex planning rules, and funding issues (the green investment push will require significant private-sector investment). Transport infrastructure is well developed, but years of spending restraint have heightened road congestion and repair backlogs, with poor co-ordination between the different levels of government delaying high-speed rail projects and the planned Fehmarn Belt link with Denmark. Germany has extensive fourth generation (4G) coverage and compares well for "5G-readiness" and the rollout of its 5G network. Broadband availability and quality are good, but coverage and take-up of ultra-fast services lag many regional peers. This reflects legacy infrastructure network constraints and limited availability of fibre-to-the-home (FTTH) connections, although there have been recent improvement in these areas.

- Accelerated plans for FTTH rollout, ongoing 4G/5G network builds and policy support (new state-funded schemes targeting less populated areas were launched in 2021) will bring improvements in ultra-fast broadband availability and help to narrow a sizeable urban-rural digital divide. However, meeting a 2025 nationwide coverage target for gigabit-ready broadband will remain challenging.

The new government has set more ambitious climate change targets
- The post-Fukushima decision by Germany in 2011 to phase out domestic nuclear power by end-2022 has driven a steady shift towards renewables-mostly solar and wind-power-although it has also contributed to heavily polluting coal still accounting for an above-average share of the energy mix. The new government has set more ambitious 2030 targets than its predecessor for the share of renewables in power generation and emissions reduction, and is pursuing an accelerated coal phase-out by 2030 (previously 2038). EU grants under the RRF will be allocated to a range of green transition measures, notably funding for EV subsidies and charging infrastructure, and promoting hydrogen usage in industry. Progress will be hindered by sluggish power-grid development, planning constraints, the political influence of coal-mining regions and the fallout from the war (soaring energy costs are likely to drive a near-term rise in coal consumption).

Reducing energy dependence on Russia is a key policy priority
- Accelerated investment and diplomatic efforts to reduce Germany's high dependence on Russian gas will reduce energy-security risk only gradually. A sudden halt to gas imports, especially in the winter, would cause major disruption to the economy. The conflict has driven an increased focus on liquefied natural gas (LNG), but global supply is limited. The government has acquired four floating storage regasification units (FSRUs)-specialised ships that allow LNG to be converted to gas and fed into the existing grid-the first of which will be operational by end-2022. However, it will fall short of its import needs, and the tight LNG market will constrain imports. Additional LNG terminal capacity is not likely before 2024.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
8.9 9.2 11 4 6 2
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Germany scores highly on a regional and global basis for technological readiness, owing to the scope of its digital infrastructure, strong e-commerce and e-business penetration, above-average digital skill levels, the national Industry 4.0 initiative aimed at supporting digital manufacturing, and a well-developed framework for research and innovation. Weaker aspects are the comparatively slow pace of ultrafast broadband rollout, modest digital adoption (and innovation activity) by SMEs, shortages of ICT specialists and below-par scope and quality of e-government services. Investment in R&D was 3.1% of GDP in 2020, one of the highest ratios in the EU. R&D intensity has trended steadily higher over the past decade, driven primarily by large firms in medium- and high-tech manufacturing (the EV shift in the automotive industry has been a major driver). An official target is to raise total R&D investment to 3.5% of GDP by 2025. In recent years Germany has slipped from being an "innovation leader" to a "strong innovator" on the European Commission's Innovation Scoreboard. Germany scores well for business investment and public-private linkages, but lags its peers in entrepreneurship and financing support. Berlin is the hub for entrepreneurial dynamism in Germany, but national indicators of innovative high-growth firms, start-up activity and SME innovations have weakened over recent years. Germany has a National Cyber Response Centre, and updated its cyber-security strategy in 2021. According to the Global Cybersecurity Index from the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Germany ranks 13th for its commitment and capacity to deal with cybercrime and cyber-espionage.
State funding to boost digitalisation in the private sector will increase
- A strategic focus of the new government is on bolstering digital adoption by SMEs, supporting digitalisation of production in the automotive sector, improving the quality of e-government services (particularly in the health system, and by harmonising infrastructure across the federal, state and municipal levels), and addressing the shortage of ICT specialists in the workforce. Funding for existing and new schemes in these areas will increase over the forecast period, supported by EU grants under the RRF, which will also be directed to EU-wide initiatives in microelectronics and next-generation cloud infrastructure.

The ongoing 5G network rollout will drive increasing digitalisation by companies and the state in areas such as cloud services, data analytics, smart city applications, digital payments and artificial intelligence (AI) solutions. Constraining factors will be skilled labour shortages, data-privacy issues, global supply-chain disruption, rising geopolitical tensions over technology regulation and competition, and steadily increasing cyber-security risks.
Economic forecast: Policy trends There were two main areas of cross-party consensus in the 2021 election campaign: the importance of addressing climate change and the need to raise investment spending. Years of fiscal restraint have resulted in crumbling transport infrastructure and poor digital connectivity, and meeting green goals will require substantial overhauls of industry, building regulations and the energy sector. The transformation of the large automotive sector towards low-emissions vehicles has been slower than in Germany's competitors, and the supply-chain issues thrown up by the pandemic have made calls for industrial sovereignty more pressing. Finally, the economic fallout from the pandemic has made questions of social justice-especially concerning income inequality, child poverty and wages-more compelling. In response to these issues, the coalition agreement envisages an increase in the minimum wage and the expansion of social welfare programmes for low earners, as well as greater investment in green infrastructure. However, funding for these programmes will be a source of friction for the coalition and is likely to limit their ambition.
The war in Ukraine has led to a renewed push for energy security and the phasing-out of two-thirds of Russian gas imports by the end of the year. A full gas cut-off is not our forecast. However, on June 1st a Russian gas provider, Gazprom, cut off one German gas provider, and we believe that similar cut-offs are likely throughout the year, gradually constraining German energy supply. The government has announced that it will invest in three new liquefied natural gas terminals, one of which will be operational by the end of 2022, and increase funding for renewables. However, most of the impact of these initiatives will take years to come to fruition, and the government has focused on encouraging households to decrease their energy use in the interim, with the risk of rationing gas to industry this winter if sufficient new supply cannot be found.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Government expenditure 51.6 48.0 46.0 45.5 45.3 45.1
Government revenue 47.9 44.8 44.5 45.2 45.2 45.1
Budget balance -3.7 -3.2 -1.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1
Government debt 69.5 69.7 67.8 66.0 64.1 61.9
Germany's fiscal account is set to run a significant deficit in 2022 for the third consecutive year. After six years of surpluses the budget shifted into deficit in 2020-21, reflecting significant fiscal stimulus, including the Kurzarbeit furlough scheme. The government's commitment to increasing defence spending to 2% of GDP, as well as expanding programmes cushioning households and businesses facing higher energy costs following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, will further drive up expenditure.
The government's fiscal plan to 2025 foresees significantly higher capital investment than before the pandemic, at about EUR52bn per year, up from EUR38bn in 2019. This will be channelled to a wide range of sectors, including artificial intelligence, the roll-out of fifth-generation (5G) technology and innovation in the automotive industry. The health fund will receive a significant boost, as will education and childcare, and a large portion of the money will go to Germany's national hydrogen strategy as part of its energy transition.
As a result of this expenditure, we expect Germany to run a fiscal deficit of 3.2% of GDP in 2022. From 2023 we expect the government to refocus on fiscal consolidation. Revenue-raising reforms are unlikely, given that the coalition agreement committed to no tax rises at the insistence of the FDP. However, as spending falls as a share of GDP the fiscal deficit will decline sharply from 2023.
After peaking at a forecast 69.5% of GDP in 2022, we expect public debt to fall to about 62% of GDP by end-2026. The government is currently taking advantage of an exception clause in the country's constitutional debt brake for crisis periods, with the debt brake unlikely to be reimposed before 2024. Longer term, changing this mechanism is unlikely, as it would require a two-thirds majority in the Bundestag (the lower house), and the FDP has committed to maintaining the brake. Assuming no new tax measures, much of the new spending promised by the government will be channelled through off-balance-sheet bodies, most prominently the state-owned investment bank, KfW.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Short-term interest rate (av) -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
Long-term interest rate (av) -0.3 0.8 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4
Surging inflation is forcing the European Central Bank (ECB) to begin to unwind its policy stimulus. Inflation across the euro zone reached 8.1% year on year in May, well above the ECB's target of 2%, and will remain elevated well into 2023. Energy costs are the most prominent driver of inflation, but core price pressures are strengthening rapidly and medium-term inflation expectations are showing signs of becoming unanchored. We expect the ECB to end quantitative easing (QE) at the end of June 2022 and to begin to raise interest rates from July.
Once the ECB begins its tightening cycle, we expect that it will act decisively in front-loading rate increases rather than pursuing a gradual approach. However, the policy outlook is uncertain and subject to several risks. We expect energy prices to remain at their current high levels for the duration of the conflict in Ukraine and this could provoke a downturn in European manufacturing in the second half of the year, thereby forcing the ECB to slow the pace of monetary tightening. A sudden tightening of financing conditions across the euro zone, particularly in high-debt member states, is another risk that would prompt the ECB to adopt a more cautious stance. Over the past two years QE has absorbed the bulk of new public debt issuance and insulated governments from market pressures. These pressures could re-emerge once interest rates begin to rise, and some market repricing of the debt of peripheral euro zone members has already begun.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Economic growth (%)
US GDP 5.7 2.5 1.9 1.7 1.9 1.7
OECD GDP 5.2 2.7 1.9 2.0 1.9 1.8
EU27 GDP 5.3 2.4 1.9 2.1 1.9 1.9
World GDP 5.7 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.6 2.6
World trade 10.5 4.2 4.8 4.1 3.7 3.6
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 4.7 7.2 2.8 2.1 2.1 2.1
OECD CPI 3.6 7.1 3.3 2.3 2.3 2.2
EU27 CPI 2.8 6.4 2.9 2.0 1.9 1.9
Manufactures (measured in US$) 5.8 1.3 2.8 2.6 2.4 1.9
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 70.4 105.6 89.4 76.5 70.5 66.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 37.9 23.6 -8.3 -6.1 -4.9 -3.1
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.1 1.7 3.5 3.1 3.0 3.0
€ 3-month interbank rate (av; %) -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
US$:€ (av) 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
¥:€ (av) 129.92 132.71 142.62 149.29 146.92 146.63
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP 2.9 1.3 0.9 1.7 2.1 2.2
Private consumption 0.3 3.2 1.0 1.4 1.3 1.1
Government consumption 2.9 2.8 2.9 2.0 1.6 1.7
Gross fixed investment 1.0 2.6 2.4 2.1 2.4 2.4
Exports of goods & services 9.5 3.2 2.5 3.5 3.7 4.0
Imports of goods & services 9.0 5.5 4.2 3.7 2.8 3.0
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 1.1 -0.5 -0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 2.2 2.4 1.7 1.8 1.6 1.6
Agriculture 1.5 -2.0 0.7 1.9 2.0 2.2
Industry 3.1 2.8 1.4 2.7 3.8 2.2
Services 2.8 0.8 0.8 1.3 1.3 2.2
Even before Russia's invasion of Ukraine, Germany's recent economic performance had been lacklustre. A quarterly contraction in real GDP in October-December 2021 due to the reimposition of some coronavirus restrictions and Germany's disproportionate exposure to supply-chain disruptions in China delayed Germany's return to pre-pandemic levels of GDP. At the end of 2021 the German economy was 1.5% smaller than its pre-crisis size, in contrast to most other major European economies, which have either staged a full recovery or are closer to doing so. German growth rebounded by 0.2% in January-March 2022, although much of this was related to the final relaxation of covid restrictions.
The Russian invasion will drag further on growth in 2022. Germany is among the countries most exposed to Russian energy imports, sourcing 55% of its natural gas from Russia, and the EU's decision to phase out two-thirds of Russian gas this year will therefore lead to a significant spike in German energy costs, particularly in the industrial sector. Other spiking commodity prices will also weigh on purchasing power, and hence on private consumption. In addition, even as supply chains in Europe stabilise, pandemic-related lockdowns in China will drag on German industrial production further, while uncertainty about the domestic economic impact of EU sanctions on Russia will damage business confidence.
These factors are likely to weigh most heavily on economic activity and confidence in the winter as energy reserves are drawn down, business confidence remains low, and tighter monetary policy begins to bite, and a technical recession (two consecutive quarters of negative economic growth) is likely in the second half of 2022. We have revised down our full-year forecast for growth in 2022 from 2.5% before the Russian invasion to 1.4%, with much of this expansion resulting from a favourable comparison with 2021, when pandemic restrictions remained in place for much of the first half of the year.
In 2023 we expect similarly lacklustre growth, of 0.9%, as these headwinds persist. Growth will begin to rebound more robustly from 2024 as energy markets, monetary policy and supply chains gradually normalise, averaging 2% per year in 2024-26. Germany's poor demographic outlook will constrain potential growth as the working-age population declines. Technological disruption in the automotive sector also represents a structural risk; Germany has been slow to shift emphasis towards electric vehicles. Efforts to reduce supply-chain dependence on China may allow automation and digitalisation to gain pace, and links with suppliers in central and eastern Europe to strengthen.




Enlarge this image.
Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends Services account for about 70% of GDP, industry for almost 30% and agriculture less than 1%. The share of industry in the German economy exceeds those of all the other major economies in Europe, with the UK and France both below 20% and even Italy barely at 24%. This proved an advantage for Germany during the pandemic in 2020-21, as industrial production was less disrupted by social-distancing restrictions than contact-intensive services. However, in 2022, as supply-chain disruptions from the pandemic worsened after Russia's invasion of Ukraine, Germany's large industrial sector became a disadvantage. Ongoing pandemic-related supply-chain disruptions in Asia, particularly in China, have persisted, and disproportionately affected Germany. We do not expect supply-chain frictions and semiconductor shortages to even start to ease until 2023, meaning that Germany's economy will continue to underperform those of its peers in western Europe in the short to medium term.
The automotive sector is currently managing a structural transition Germany's most important manufacturing sectors are automotive, electrical and mechanical engineering, chemicals, and food, drink and tobacco. Germany is the global leader in the production of premium cars, an industry that has benefited from robust competition between several domestic companies, ownership structures that have enabled firms to make long-term investments, and a host of innovative supplier companies in the mechanical and electrical engineering sectors. Cluster effects are significant, and Germany's industrial champions increasingly provide value added through services supplied in conjunction with manufactured products. The automotive sector is currently managing a structural transition towards electric and hybrid vehicles, having historically invested heavily in diesel technology and entered the electric market comparatively late. This transition will be particularly disruptive for the SMEs in the Mittelstand that produce intermediate components for the carmaking sector, as electric motors require far fewer components than internal combustion engines. A Tesla Gigafactory that opened in March 2022 outside Berlin, the capital, was built in an exceptionally fast 22 months, and will produce batteries as well, providing new competition for the German brands.
As major producers of capital goods, German firms were able to weather the years following the global financial crisis by profiting from rapid industrialisation in emerging markets such as China and India. China is now a rapidly growing competitor in the high-tech industrial sector and Germany's second-largest export market. However, the optics of doing business with China have become much more troubled in 2021-22, as China's human rights abuses and discriminatory trade practices have risen up the political agenda in Europe, and China has refused to condemn Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Most industries derive competitive advantages from Germany's well-developed system of vocational training, good physical infrastructure and research base, and a tax system that encourages capital investment. Fiscal stimulus measures targeted towards infrastructure improvements, and the green and digital transitions will continue to support construction, which is currently facing capacity constraints in the face of accelerating demand. Although we do not expect the EUR750bn Next Generation EU recovery fund to directly spur much infrastructure spending in Germany itself, sharp rises in other member states will result in spillover benefits for German companies in 2022-26.
The pandemic has had an asymmetric impact on the services sector The services sector is the largest component of GDP and comprises a broad range of activities, from retailing to financial services, logistics and healthcare. The pandemic has had a highly asymmetric impact on the services sector, with contact-intensive services such as retail, accommodation and foodservice heavily affected, while professional services that can be performed remotely have held up well. Many of the changes prompted by the pandemic-more remote working, less business travel, a rise in e-commerce at the expense of bricks-and-mortar retailers-will endure throughout our forecast period.
The financial services sector entered the pandemic in a comparatively strong position, with high capital-adequacy ratios and low levels of non-performing loans. The shock from the Russia-Ukraine war was modest, given limited direct exposure of Germany's banking sector to Russia or Ukraine: the European banks with the largest exposure are Raiffeisen (Austria), UniCredit (Italy) and Société Générale (France). However, the higher-inflation, lower-growth outlook for Germany in 2022-23 will weigh on banking sector revenue and profitability, particularly if there is an uptick in corporate bankruptcies.
Economic forecast: Inflation   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Consumer price inflation (%; EU harmonised measure) 3.2 7.7 3.3 2.1 1.9 1.9
Hourly wages in industry (% change; nominal) 1.6 3.9 3.6 2.7 2.7 2.7
Hourly wages in industry (% change; real) -1.6 -3.5 0.3 0.6 0.8 0.8
Unit labour costs (% change; US$) 4.5 -2.2 8.0 5.7 4.7 2.9
Labour costs per hour (US$; level) 52.3 50.4 54.3 58.3 61.7 64.1
The Russian invasion of Ukraine will exacerbate inflation, which had already reached multi-decade highs in 2021. Inflation accelerated to 8.8% in May, the fastest rate since German reunification. The Russia-Ukraine war and sanctions on Russia are driving up the price of energy, to which Germany is particularly exposed, and affecting food prices. War-related spikes in base metal prices and the ongoing pandemic-related lockdowns in China will drive producer price inflation to 20.6% in 2022. Monthly inflation will moderate in the second half of the year, and we forecast an annual average inflation rate of 7.7% this year and 3.3% in 2023, moderating to an average of 1.9% in 2024-26.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
Exchange rate US$:€ (end-period) 1.13 1.12 1.18 1.22 1.24 1.25
Exchange rate ¥:€ (av) 129.9 132.7 142.6 149.3 146.9 146.6
Real effective exchange-rate index (2010=100; av) 97.6 97.0 98.3 98.9 98.7 98.4
Purchasing power parity €:US$ (av) 0.73 0.75 0.76 0.75 0.74 0.73
The euro has depreciated sharply against the US dollar since the start of 2022, reaching US$1.05:EUR1 at the end of April. This reflects increased investor concerns in the aftermath of Russia's invasion of Ukraine and a growing divergence between the monetary policy stances of the ECB and the Federal Reserve (the US central bank). In the remainder of 2022 we expect the euro to partially recover against the dollar as the ECB begins to raise interest rates, closing the year at about US$1.12:EUR1. However, the euro area's weaker growth outlook and a pace of monetary tightening that is considerably slower than in the US will continue to weigh on the value of the single currency in the short term. We expect a more sustained appreciatory trend to begin in 2023, when the interest-rate differential with the US narrows. Over the medium term, the value of the single currency will continue to be supported by a structural current-account surplus.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Current-account balance 314.1 270.5 294.2 319.4 345.3 365.5
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 7.5 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.5
Goods: exports fob 1,616.8 1,929.9 2,054.3 2,213.1 2,343.3 2,468.3
Goods: imports fob -1,388.5 -1,697.4 -1,790.5 -1,926.2 -2,045.5 -2,144.3
Trade balance 228.2 232.6 263.9 286.9 297.8 324.1
Services: credit 386.7 399.7 442.7 480.0 523.5 564.0
Services: debit -386.0 -425.1 -459.5 -503.2 -551.5 -596.0
Services balance 0.7 -25.4 -16.9 -23.2 -27.9 -32.0
Primary income: credit 277.8 241.6 268.4 281.9 299.6 323.2
Primary income: debit -128.7 -121.6 -168.3 -178.8 -184.4 -208.0
Primary income balance 149.1 120.0 100.1 103.0 115.2 115.2
Secondary income: credit 107.9 109.6 119.9 129.5 137.5 144.0
Secondary income: debit -171.8 -166.3 -172.8 -176.8 -177.3 -185.8
Secondary income balance -63.9 -56.6 -52.9 -47.3 -39.8 -41.7
The higher cost of imported energy and a slowdown in industrial production as a result of sharply rising input prices and ongoing supply-chain disruptions (including shortages of semiconductors, which we expect to continue until at least the fourth quarter of 2022) will prompt a decline in Germany's current-account surplus in this year. We expect this surplus to fall from 7.5% of GDP in 2021 to 6.3% in 2022, driven by a deterioration in the trade balance, and stabilise at this level in 2023-26, below the pre-pandemic level.
Despite the decline, Germany's current-account surpluses will remain large in 2022-26 by regional standards, underpinned by wide trade surpluses, reflecting the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector, along with large primary income surpluses from Germany's high domestic savings rate, most of which are invested abroad. These surpluses will comfortably outweigh narrow structural deficits on the services and secondary income accounts.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Germany Stocks and flows Germany is an attractive destination for foreign investment, but the country's role as an exporter of long-term capital is more important: it is the fourth-largest investor in the world. The skills of its workforce, the availability of supplier companies, the quality of the research and innovation framework, and a reliable administrative and legal environment make Germany one of the most attractive global destinations for inward foreign direct investment (FDI). However, relative to GDP, the stock of such investment is lower than in some other comparatively sized economies. Following a significant increase in inflows during the 1990s, the rate of growth of FDI then slowed, falling below the world average, and outflows have exceeded inflows since 2004-with the exception of 2020, at the height of the coronavirus pandemic, which disrupted the progress of investment deals. In 2021 as the economy recovered FDI flows started to normalise, although outflows (at EUR193.7bn) were much healthier than inflows (at EUR73.7bn). By end-2021 the inward FDI stock came to EUR2trn, equivalent to 48.3% of GDP; the outward FDI stock stood at EUR3trn, or 70.3% of GDP.
Origin and distribution As is the case in other developed countries, the FDI stock in Germany is increasingly dominated by service providers rather than by manufacturers, although manufacturers remain important, in line with the relatively large size of the manufacturing sector. About two-thirds of Germany's inward FDI stock originates from other EU member states-although this sometimes includes investment from outside the EU that is transferred through countries such as the Netherlands and Luxembourg, often for tax reasons. The most important investor from outside the EU is the US, which accounts for 12% of the total stock (and was responsible for the largest number of greenfield and expansion projects in 2021, at 254). Authorities and companies have become increasingly hesitant about increasing investment from China (which amounts to just over 1% of the FDI stock), which often targets mid-sized companies with significant technological know-how. This is likely to weigh on investment from China in the coming years, given new investment screening measures at the EU level. Most outward investment is to other EU countries, but investment in Switzerland, the US, Russia and China is also significant.
Determinants Germany's attractiveness as an investment location stems from its robust institutional framework, stable legal code, strong research and innovation capacity, and an extensive network of global and regional supply chains. The country also has good infrastructure, a number of innovative high-tech clusters and a high-quality workforce. Labour costs are among the highest in the world, but compare strongly with European peers owing to a lengthy period of wage restraint. Germany Trade and Invest is the first point of contact for foreign investors, and provides details about recent trends and growing areas of demand-information and communication technology (ICT) and software was the most dynamic area of inward investment in 2021 (19% of total deals), followed by business and financial services (15%). Foreign investors, including private equity firms, are attracted by the large number of profitable medium-sized companies specialising in niche markets. Regulations such as the right of worker representatives to sit on company boards (up to half of board members) have deterred some foreign investors, but in practice the system of workforce representation in companies often helps company management bodies to communicate their strategies and, where necessary, explain the need for changes in working practice-or even reduced pay in difficult circumstances. The tax environment remains, on balance, a downside.
Impact Foreign-owned companies employ about 2.5m people in Germany. Many FDI inflows take the form of acquisitions rather than greenfield investment, and hence the immediate impact on employment is not clear (and in some cases is initially negative). In industry, especially manufacturing, the dominance of German firms means that FDI has had only a limited impact. Foreign investment in Germany's services has had a larger impact on the domestic economy, boosting productivity via the introduction of new technology and fewer hierarchical organisational structures. Investment by private equity groups has also helped to inject capital and managerial expertise into slow-growing family-owned businesses.
Potential Germany's skilled workforce and sound infrastructure make it a good location for specialised manufacturing. More generally, the structure of German industry is still relatively fragmented, providing foreign investors with the opportunity to participate in sectoral consolidation and to reap economies of scale through acquisitions. The generational changeover at the helm of several small and medium-sized companies provides opportunities for foreign investors, although in many cases foreign involvement is not appreciated. The still-moderate level of property prices-by west European standards-and increasing demand for housing, especially in urban areas, may attract investors into this sector. A poor demographic outlook, with population growth set to stagnate and then decline, will constrain Germany's potential as a consumer market. Government screening of inward investment has increased recently and will remain high, as political pressure to protect sensitive industries has increased in recent years and has broadened from traditional strategic industries, such as defence, to high-tech industries, driven by the desire not to sell technology to future competitors, and the healthcare sector. This is the case across Europe, and has led to delays in approving projects and more frequent rejections of takeovers.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2016 2021 2026
Population (m)
Total 82.6 82.9 82.7
 Male 40.7 41.0 41.0
 Female 41.9 41.9 41.7
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 13.2 13.6 13.9
 15-64 65.4 63.8 61.5
 65+ 21.3 22.6 24.6
Young-age dependency ratio 0.20 0.21 0.23
Old-age dependency ratio 0.33 0.35 0.40
Working-age population (m) 54.0 52.9 50.8
Urbanisation (% of total) 77.2 77.5 77.8
Labour force (m) 42.8 43.0 42.5
       
Period averages   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth (%)   0.1 0.0
Working-age population growth (%)   -0.4 -0.8
Labour force growth (%)   0.1 -0.2
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   9.2 9.4
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   11.1 11.6
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   3.2 3.1
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   78.5 79.3
 Female   83.4 84.0
 Average   81.0 81.6
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; EIU estimates and forecasts; National statistics.
As a consequence of the pandemic, there was no population growth in 2020-21 Germany's population declined between 2002 and 2011, but high levels of net immigration underpinned population growth in the 2012-19 period. The population reached 82.8m in 2018 and has stabilised at about this level, up from about 80.3m in 2011, boosted in particular by the impact of the migrant crisis in 2015. The pandemic in 2020-21 resulted in a higher death rate, lower net immigration and slightly fewer births than in 2019, meaning that there was no population growth in either year for the first time in nine years. EIU forecasts that the population will increase marginally in 2022 as net immigration is boosted by the arrival of Ukrainian refugees (780,000, according to UN data from June), before beginning a longer-term trend of decline.
The population has recorded a natural decline in every year since 1972, with the death rate higher than the birth rate, and this will continue to be the case in 2022-26. The birth rate plummeted after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, especially in East Germany, but more recently this trend has reversed, with the fertility rate rising to 1.5 children per woman in 2021-the highest figure since the 1970s. This reflects both policy efforts, such as an expansion in childcare provision and parental benefits, and a higher fertility rate among immigrant communities. However, this is still well below the replacement rate of 2.1, the rate needed to keep the population size constant in the absence of migration.
Population growth will depend on net immigration, given no natural growth Population growth since 1972 has come entirely from positive net immigration. This peaked in 2015 during the migrant crisis, when migrants and refugees from conflict zones in the Middle East and North Africa were attracted to Germany in particular because of its strong economy and initially welcoming policy stance. However, the sheer volume of arrivals soon proved politically unsustainable, prompting a hardening of the government's position. The influx of migrants slowed in 2016-17, reflecting the closing of the Balkan route into the EU and an agreement (brokered by Germany) between the EU and Turkey to stop migrants crossing into the bloc illegally from Turkey. In 2022 Russia's invasion of Ukraine prompted another outflow of refugees, but the European identity and cultural similarities of these people, along with strong political support for the country's plight across the EU, meant that the popular reaction was much more positive. So far Germany has accepted 780,000 refugees, the largest number in the EU after Poland (with 3.8m). The EU has agreed on a temporary mechanism for Ukrainian refugees that gives them the right to live and work in the bloc for up to three years without complex asylum procedures, which will aid their integration into the labour force.
The working-age population is declining more swiftly than the European average Nonetheless, the demographic outlook will remain poor. As in the region more broadly, the population is ageing, with the old-age dependency ratio expected to rise throughout the forecast period and the working-age population already in decline. We expect the share of the population aged 15-64 to fall throughout the forecast period, from 63.8% in 2021 to 61.5% in 2026. The share of the working-age population in Germany dipped below that of Italy in 2018 and the UK in 2020, and is falling more swiftly than in any of the country's regional peers. This is likely to lead to greater pressure on the pensions and healthcare systems, and over time will exacerbate labour shortages. Efforts have already been made to attract more women and older workers into employment, but there will be diminishing returns from these over the forecast period, and data from 2020 suggest that the policy response to the pandemic (including school closures) has damaged the female labour force participation rate. Policy innovation will also be needed to attract immigrants into the labour market.
Germany has the second-highest number of immigrants in the world, after the US, with more than 16m first- and second-generation immigrants. The largest groups in 2019 (latest available data) were from Turkey (double the size of any other group), Poland, Syria, Romania and Italy. Aside from a large inflow of migrants from the Middle East and the Balkans in 2015-16, the turnaround in net immigration since 2011 reflects a rise in the number of people migrating to Germany from Poland, Romania and Bulgaria, and to a lesser extent from crisis-hit members of the euro zone such as Italy and Greece. In 2022, between Russia's invasion of Ukraine and June 7th, Germany received 780,000 Ukrainian refugees, the largest number in Europe with the exception of Poland. Germany has largely been successful at integrating the migrant labour force, and we expect this to be the case with the Ukrainian refugees as well.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Population (m) 82.9 82.9 82.9 82.8 82.7 82.7
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 4,216 4,283 4,686 5,061 5,373 5,628
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 50,862 51,676 56,557 61,120 64,928 68,052
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 4,869 5,203 5,420 5,653 5,891 6,151
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 58,749 62,771 65,422 68,270 71,186 74,374
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 2,411 2,355 2,540 2,724 2,879 2,991
Median household income (US$) 51,620 50,113 52,881 56,281 59,619 –
Household consumption (US$ bn) 2,088 2,144 2,318 2,500 2,651 2,760
Household consumption per head (US$) 25,190 25,860 27,980 30,190 32,030 33,370
Exports of goods & services (% change) 9.5 3.2 2.5 3.5 3.7 4.0
Imports of goods & services (% change) 9.0 5.5 4.2 3.7 2.8 3.0
Germany will remain the fourth-largest economy in the world in 2026 Measured by GDP at current exchange rates, Germany is the fourth-largest economy in the world, behind the US, China and Japan. According to EIU's forecasts, this will still be the case in 2026, with German GDP at about US$5.6trn. On a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis, the German economy is the fifth-largest in the world, behind China, the US, India and Japan. Germany is the largest economy in Europe, about 40% larger than the French economy, the second-biggest; and accounts for just over one-fifth of total EU GDP. It is the largest consumer market in the EU in terms of population size, and GDP per head is the highest of the large economies. However, the market for consumer goods is reduced by an elevated savings rate, a cultural reluctance to buy on credit and the second-highest tax wedge as a share of labour costs in the OECD.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
US$ bn            
Food, beverages & tobacco 323.1 336.7 364.1 389.7 414.6 427.3
Housing & household fuels 531.5 560.6 603.5 648.4 684.0 706.3
Clothing & footwear 80.8 84.1 90.1 97.8 102.8 105.4
Household goods & services 142.5 139.1 149.2 159.2 166.3 171.5
Health 109.5 112.9 120.2 128.6 135.9 141.9
Transport & communications 330.3 334.8 364.1 396.4 424.1 447.9
Leisure & education 222.9 229.4 252.4 272.0 287.7 300.5
Hotels & restaurants 80.1 86.3 95.3 105.0 113.5 121.2
Other 267.1 259.8 279.1 302.6 322.0 338.1
Total 2,088 2,144 2,318 2,500 2,651 2,760
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 15.5 15.7 15.7 15.6 15.6 15.5
Housing & household fuels 25.5 26.1 26.0 25.9 25.8 25.6
Clothing & footwear 3.9 3.9 3.9 3.9 3.9 3.8
Household goods & services 6.8 6.5 6.4 6.4 6.3 6.2
Health 5.2 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.1 5.1
Transport & communications 15.8 15.6 15.7 15.9 16.0 16.2
Leisure & education 10.7 10.7 10.9 10.9 10.9 10.9
Hotels & restaurants 3.8 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4
Other 12.8 12.1 12.0 12.1 12.1 12.2
The pandemic caused major disruption to retail and supported e-commerce Germany's consumer goods and retail sector faced significant disruption from the coronavirus pandemic and related supply-chain disruption. National lockdowns, social distancing measures and changed working patterns contributed to volatile swings in the composition of household spending, and contrasting fortunes across different consumer-facing categories (good for foodservice, grocers and household goods; bad for hospitality and clothing). These changes reinforced a trend shift towards online retail and digital payments (where Germany had tended to lag most of its regional peers).
Retail sales in Germany comprise about one-third of all household spending. By April 2022 almost all pandemic-related restrictions in Germany (and the wider EU) had been lifted. In 2020-21 household spending was concentrated more on retail goods, given restrictions across most services sectors. This will reverse in 2022, with growth in the hospitality, travel, entertainment and personal care sectors being accompanied by a moderation in retail demand. Spending patterns will steadily normalise by 2023, assuming no renewed virus disruption. Virus risks will persist amid potential new variants, but vaccine progress and public sentiment suggest a low probability of restrictions being reimposed on a scale that would significantly impair economic activity.
The short-term outlook for consumer demand is weak given rising inflation Although virus-related risks have diminished, the near-term outlook for retail and consumer demand remains weak. Sharply rising food and energy prices, broadening inflationary pressures and heightened caution related to the Russia-Ukraine war will weigh on household purchasing power, buying intentions and consumer sentiment in 2022. Economic activity this year will be weaker than implied by the headline growth figure, which is inflated by its comparison with lockdown-constrained output in the first half of 2021. We expect no growth in retail sales volumes in 2022, amid a real-income squeeze and a shift in spending from goods to services, before modest annual average growth returns in 2023.
Downside risks to our forecasts are significant: escalation of the war and/or a sudden halt to Russian gas imports could trigger greater disruption to the German economy. Household balance sheets are fairly robust-bolstered during the pandemic by precautionary saving and wealth gains from asset-price inflation-and unemployment is low, implying scope for firmer consumer demand once external risks diminish, albeit partly constrained by higher and "stickier" price levels (including for most essential items).
A major focus of grocery (and other) retailers in recent years has been revising store formats and services in response to growing digitisation and consumer demand for convenience-trends that have been reinforced by the pandemic. This process will continue through the expansion of cashier-free and 24-hour stores, "scan and go" purchases, click-and-collect services, and online grocery delivery (or quick commerce). Online marketplaces will continue to grow, amid increased regulatory scrutiny and new e-commerce taxation.
Population ageing will influence longer-term spending patterns Germany is a mature consumer market, but demographic and social trends will influence spending patterns in the coming years. The rise in the number of single and two-person households, which now comprise three-quarters of the total, will support sales of white goods. There is also a rising demand for services for older consumers, particularly in the health and tourism sectors.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2021   2026  
  Germany Western Europe (av) Germany Western Europe (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 12.5 11.3 12.7 11.1
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 6,358 5,244 8,477 6,723
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 3.2 3.2 3.0 3.0
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 4.5 4.0 4.9 4.2
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 15.5 16.6 15.5 15.5
Meat consumption (kg per person) 92.7 89.6 98.2 94.7
Milk consumption (litres per person) 282.0 261.0 291.0 276.0
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 8.1 6.2 8.5 6.6
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 586 559 572 547
Telephone main lines 458 415 444 404
Mobile phone subscribers 1,300 1,210 1,360 1,240
Television sets 702 837 765 933
Personal computers 885 843 932 867
Households
No. of households (m) 41.6 193.1 41.8 200.9
No. of people per household (av) 2.0 2.2 2.0 2.1
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 51,620 53,480 62,330 63,320
Average monthly wage (US$) 4,310 4,150 5,050 5,010
Gini index 31.7 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); EIU estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population -0.06 -0.19 -0.15
Working-age population -0.90 -0.45 -0.59
Working-age minus total population -0.80 -0.27 -0.43
Labour force -0.37 -0.28 -0.30
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 1.6 1.5 1.6
Growth of real GDP 1.6 1.3 1.4
Labour productivity growth 1.7 1.6 1.7
Growth of capital stock 1.7 1.7 1.7
Total factor productivity growth 1.1 0.9 1.0
Initial conditions: Germany is a highly developed social market economy that is unusually export-oriented for its size (exports account for over 50% of GDP, versus about 30% in France and the UK, and 11% in the US). Over half of production from sectors such as carmaking, mechanical and plant engineering, chemicals and medical technology is exported. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), known as the Mittelstand, account for 99% of the total number of companies. A world-famous vocational education system and strong spending on research and development (R&D) underpin the industrial sector. Germany has many attributes that are conducive to sustainable long-term growth, including a highly skilled workforce, good infrastructure and stable institutions. Moreover, the structural shift away from manufacturing and towards services has been less pronounced in Germany than in other OECD members, with growth in services likely to come from areas linked to the industrial sector.
The demographic outlook will prove the biggest drag on long-term growth Demographic trends: Germany's demographics will weigh on growth in the long-term period, with the total population set to shrink by an annual average of 1.5% in 2022-50, and the working-age population set to decline at an even more rapid rate of 0.59% per year. The retirement age is gradually being raised to 67 by 2031, but the ruling Social Democratic Party (SPD) has ruled out any further increase. Efforts to increase the participation rate are more likely to focus on tightening the conditions for long-term unemployment benefits and bringing more women, immigrants, lower skilled and older workers into the active labour force. The negative rate of natural change in the population will continue to be slightly offset by positive immigration, with further liberalisation of immigration rules for highly skilled workers from non-EU countries possible. Policy will remain more welcoming to refugees and immigrants from central or eastern Europe than to those from the Middle East or Africa, in view of cultural similarities.
External conditions: As an export-oriented country, Germany benefits from the broadly liberal world trade order, and will continue to push to reform the World Trade Organisation in order to maintain this. Germany suffers less than other developed countries (such as Italy) from competition from emerging markets, such as China and India, owing to its specialisation in high-technology capital goods. However, Chinese companies are increasingly able to compete with German firms in sophisticated industrial manufacturing, which is driving a growing focus in Germany on digitalisation and innovation (Industry 4.0), and, belatedly, on the move to electric mobility. In line with growing international criticism of China's human rights record Germany will aim to reduce its economic ties with China, but this will happen much less decisively than in the US. Trade ties with Russia will also fall sharply over the long term as Germany reorients its energy supply network in the wake of the Russia-Ukraine war. Within the EU the liberalisation of services trade will continue, but slowly.
Rising investment and structural reforms will support productivity Institutions and policy trends: Germany's low growth in the early 2000s focused the minds of politicians and policymakers on the need for economic reforms, many of which were implemented, along with more flexible bargaining about wages and other working conditions. These changes have put Germany at an advantage in the region more recently. Our expectation is that national and EU initiatives will continue to strengthen productivity, with (for example) continued domestic efforts to reduce regulatory barriers and to make financing easier for innovative new firms. Greater investment in infrastructure and digitalisation in the coming years will help to make up for recent shortfalls in spending driven by an overwhelming focus on fiscal probity, and will support economic growth. The public debt increased sharply during the pandemic but remains manageable; reforms to the pension system to make the public finances sustainable in the long term are, however, not yet in sight.
Long-term performance: Our forecast for the economy's long-term average annual growth rate is 1.4%, slowing from 1.6% in 2022-30 to 1.3% in 2031-50. A falling working-age population is the main driver of this slowdown; total factor productivity and capital spending will still support growth. The picture looks slightly more favourable on a per-head basis, with growth of real GDP per head averaging 1.6% in 2022-51, slightly faster than average growth since reunification in 1990. GDP per head in 2050 will therefore come to US$172,278, ahead of France and the UK but behind the US. In terms of the size of the German economy overall, we expect it to remain the fourth-largest economy in the world at market exchange rates in 2050, preceded by China, the US and India, in that order (in contrast to the current order of the US, China and Japan).
Income and market size
  2021 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 82.9 82.4 79.4
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 4,215.7 6,481.1 12,431.7
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 50,860 78,640 156,550
Private consumption (US$ bn) 2,087.9 3,154.2 5,721.9
Private consumption per head (US$) 25,190 38,270 72,050
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 4,869.4 7,070.2 13,680.8
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 58,750 85,790 172,280
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 1,988.1 3,681.7 8,805.9
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 1,764.6 3,340.3 8,129.2
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 85.1 87.6 92.8
Share of world population (%) 1.1 1.0 0.9
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 4.5 4.4 3.1
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 3.4 3.1 2.5
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 7.2 8.5 6.8
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability The Energiewende, which focuses on expanding renewable energy and reducing Germany's carbon footprint, has been a critical element of the country's energy policy for the past decade. With The Greens now in government, an agreement has been reached to accelerate the energy transition, raising the target for the share of renewables in power generation from 60% to 80% by 2030, compared with a current share of about 45% (including nuclear). The coalition also intends to bring forward the coal phase-out by eight years, to 2030. However, Russia's invasion of Ukraine is forcing a revision of Germany's energy policies, given the country's heavy reliance on gas imports from Russia. The government has already suspended approval of the new Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, which was due to start operations this year. To offset this, Germany will turn more towards liquefied natural gas (LNG); may attempt to extend the life of existing coal plants scheduled to be decommissioned in the short term; and will speed up its adoption of renewables, especially solar and wind.
Germany plans to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55% from 1990 levels by 2030, reaching climate neutrality by 2045. On the supply side, Germany aims to become a global leader in green hydrogen (produced solely with renewable energies), with an ambitious national hydrogen strategy announced in 2020.
Public support for emissions reduction is substantial. Nonetheless, frictions are likely to emerge. Closing coal-fired power stations will have a disproportionate impact on parts of east Germany where jobs are scarce and support for the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD), which denies human responsibility for climate change, is well established. The need to ensure adequate gas supplies while also reducing dependence on Russia-in line with policy efforts across the EU-will also be difficult to achieve, given limited alternative sources and inadequate LNG infrastructure.
Germany's exposure to the impact of climate change will remain comparatively low, given its geographical position, with limited coastal areas and a temperate climate. However, in recent years changes in rainfall patterns have led to low water levels in the Rhine (an important river for goods transportation), and in 2021 flash floods destroyed houses and infrastructure in the western part of the country, taking dozens of lives. We expect the government to remain willing to provide the infrastructure upgrades necessary in the face of more extreme weather patterns in the future, although in the short term construction firms will struggle with capacity constraints. Supply-chain risk may increase as countries on which the export-oriented German economy depends are damaged by climate change. Our long-term growth model, which explicitly incorporates the impact of climate change, shows that the German economy will be 1% smaller in 2050 than it would have been without this hit to growth.
Technological developments Technological advancements will have a significant effect on Germany over the long term for a number of reasons. First, the share of manufacturing in GDP is much higher there than in most other developed European countries, with industry accounting for almost 30% of the economy. According to the OECD, manufacturing is the sector most exposed to automation globally (along with agriculture), and jobs in Germany (as well as in central and eastern Europe, and Japan) are easier to automate than those in the UK, the US, Nordic countries and the Netherlands.
Second, Germany is typically strong at research and development (R&D), and innovation, which could make a transition to higher automation rates both more likely and quicker. In 2020 Germany spent 3.1% of GDP on R&D, among the highest rates in the bloc (the EU average was 2.3%), but slightly behind Belgium, Sweden and Austria. Germany also filed 31% of all patents at the European Patent Office in 2021, the second-highest share in the world, after the US with 56%.
Third, Germany is already starting from a strong position. In 2020 it was ranked by the International Federation of Robotics as the fourth most highly automated country in the world, after Singapore, South Korea and Japan. Robot density stood at 371 robots per 10,000 workers, and Germany accounted for 38% of all industrial robots in Europe.
Germany is already working to increase automation and data exchange in manufacturing technologies as part of its Industry 4.0 strategy, and efforts to embed new technologies across the industrial sector will continue over the long term. This is likely to be disruptive for the automotive sector in particular as e-mobility gains pace. It is also likely to prove difficult for the Mittelstand, the often family-owned small and medium-sized enterprises found across the country that are central to Germany's manufacturing prowess, as they may struggle to acquire the digital skills needed to compete with new challengers. Efforts to make these firms more resilient to digital disruption will gain pace in 2022-50. Although the country will not supplant the US as a leader in innovation, adoption of new technology will be consistently strong.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 3.2 3.0 2.3 -3.7 5.7 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.6 2.6
EU27 GDP growth 2.9 2.1 1.8 -6.1 5.3 2.4 1.9 2.1 1.9 1.9
Western Europe growth 2.9 1.9 1.5 -6.0 5.9 2.6 1.7 2.0 1.8 1.8
World trade growth 5.6 3.8 0.3 -4.9 10.5 4.2 4.8 4.1 3.7 3.6
US CPI 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.7 7.2 2.8 2.1 2.1 2.1
EU27 CPI 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.8 6.4 2.9 2.0 1.9 1.9
Manufactures export price 2.0 5.1 -1.4 0.8 5.8 1.3 2.8 2.6 2.4 1.9
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 70.4 105.6 89.4 76.5 70.5 66.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 132.7 142.6 149.3 146.9 146.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Expenditure on GDP (€ bn at current market prices)
GDP 3,271 3,372 3,479 3,360 3,562 3,901 4,101 4,235 4,368 4,520
Private consumption 1,704 1,753 1,805 1,706 1,764 1,952 2,029 2,092 2,155 2,217
Government consumption 648.2 670.4 705.2 754.6 800.3 901.7 967.0 1,016.8 1,062.8 1,112.0
Gross fixed investment 668.5 711.6 745.2 732.9 776.9 860.9 900.1 919.0 941.0 963.6
Exports of goods & services 1,544.0 1,598.9 1,625.8 1,455.2 1,679.8 2,095.7 2,166.9 2,235.6 2,317.8 2,426.3
Imports of goods & services 1,311.3 1,389.3 1,427.4 1,264.7 1,491.0 1,912.0 1,961.6 2,030.2 2,109.7 2,199.4
Stockbuilding 17.5 27.6 25.6 -23.5 31.8 2.0 0.0 2.0 1.0 1.0
Domestic demand 3,038 3,163 3,281 3,170 3,373 3,717 3,896 4,030 4,160 4,294
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 3,694 3,984 3,895 3,835 4,216 4,283 4,686 5,061 5,373 5,628
Private consumption 1,924 2,071 2,021 1,947 2,088 2,144 2,318 2,500 2,651 2,760
Government consumption 732.0 792.0 789.5 861.2 947.1 990.2 1,104.8 1,215.0 1,307.3 1,384.5
Gross fixed investment 755.0 840.8 834.3 836.4 919.5 945.4 1,028.3 1,098.2 1,157.5 1,199.7
Exports of goods & services 1,743.6 1,889.1 1,820.2 1,660.8 1,988.1 2,301.4 2,475.7 2,671.6 2,850.9 3,020.7
Imports of goods & services 1,480.8 1,641.5 1,598.1 1,443.3 1,764.6 2,099.6 2,241.1 2,426.1 2,594.9 2,738.3
Stockbuilding 19.8 32.6 28.7 -26.9 37.6 2.2 0.0 2.4 1.2 1.2
Domestic demand 3,431 3,737 3,673 3,617 3,992 4,082 4,451 4,815 5,117 5,345
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 52.1 52.0 51.9 50.8 49.5 50.1 49.5 49.4 49.3 49.0
Government consumption 19.8 19.9 20.3 22.5 22.5 23.1 23.6 24.0 24.3 24.6
Gross fixed investment 20.4 21.1 21.4 21.8 21.8 22.1 21.9 21.7 21.5 21.3
Stockbuilding 0.5 0.8 0.7 -0.7 0.9 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Exports of goods & services 47.2 47.4 46.7 43.3 47.2 53.7 52.8 52.8 53.1 53.7
Imports of goods & services 40.1 41.2 41.0 37.6 41.9 49.0 47.8 47.9 48.3 48.7
Memorandum item
National savings ratio (%) 28.8 29.9 29.7 28.3 30.2 28.4 28.2 28.1 28.0 27.8
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Real expenditure on GDP (€ bn at constant 2005 prices)
GDP 3,180.2 3,215.3 3,250.3 3,090.1 3,178.9 3,219.4 3,250.0 3,306.7 3,375.0 3,448.2
Private consumption 1,667.0 1,690.3 1,717.5 1,613.0 1,618.2 1,669.9 1,685.8 1,709.0 1,731.4 1,751.3
Government consumption 630.3 636.4 655.3 678.5 698.4 718.0 738.8 753.6 765.7 778.7
Gross fixed investment 647.0 669.6 682.2 661.7 668.1 685.5 701.9 716.7 733.9 751.5
Exports of goods & services 1,529.2 1,566.8 1,584.7 1,424.7 1,559.4 1,608.7 1,649.1 1,706.8 1,769.5 1,840.1
Imports of goods & services 1,310.5 1,363.0 1,402.4 1,273.7 1,388.0 1,464.6 1,525.7 1,581.4 1,626.4 1,674.8
Stockbuilding 16.7 13.8 10.8 -16.7 17.6 2.0 0.0 2.0 1.0 1.5
Domestic demand 2,960.9 3,010.1 3,065.9 2,936.5 3,002.4 3,075.3 3,126.5 3,181.3 3,231.9 3,282.9
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 3.0 1.1 1.1 -4.9 2.9 1.3 0.9 1.7 2.1 2.2
Private consumption 1.7 1.4 1.6 -6.1 0.3 3.2 1.0 1.4 1.3 1.1
Government consumption 1.7 1.0 3.0 3.5 2.9 2.8 2.9 2.0 1.6 1.7
Gross fixed investment 3.3 3.5 1.9 -3.0 1.0 2.6 2.4 2.1 2.4 2.4
Exports of goods & services 5.6 2.5 1.1 -10.1 9.5 3.2 2.5 3.5 3.7 4.0
Imports of goods & services 5.7 4.0 2.9 -9.2 9.0 5.5 4.2 3.7 2.8 3.0
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.7 -0.1 -0.1 -0.8 1.1 -0.5 -0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 2.9 1.7 1.9 -4.2 2.2 2.4 1.7 1.8 1.6 1.6
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 0.9 0.7 0.8 -3.2 0.2 1.6 0.5 0.7 0.7 0.6
Government consumption 0.3 0.2 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4
Gross fixed investment 0.7 0.7 0.4 -0.6 0.2 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
External balance 0.3 -0.5 -0.7 -1.0 0.7 -0.9 -0.6 0.1 0.5 0.7
Memorandum item
Real personal disposable income (% change) 1.9 2.1 1.7 0.0 -0.3 -1.9 0.7 0.8 1.0 0.9
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Origin of GDP (€ bn at constant 2005 prices)
GDP at factor cost 2,862 2,894 2,923 2,770 2,848 2,885 2,912 2,963 3,024 3,089
Agriculture 22 18 20 21 21 20 21 21 21 22
Industry 882 893 882 810 835 858 870 894 927 947
Services 1,958 1,984 2,020 1,936 1,990 2,006 2,021 2,048 2,075 2,120
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 6.1 -17.6 13.9 1.7 1.5 -2.0 0.7 1.9 2.0 2.2
Industry 4.1 1.2 -1.2 -8.2 3.1 2.8 1.4 2.7 3.8 2.2
Services 2.7 1.3 1.9 -4.2 2.8 0.8 0.8 1.3 1.3 2.2
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 0.8 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Industry 30.8 30.9 30.2 29.2 29.3 29.8 29.9 30.2 30.7 30.7
Services 68.4 68.6 69.1 69.9 69.9 69.5 69.4 69.1 68.6 68.6
Memorandum item
Industrial production incl construction (% change) 3.3 0.9 -3.2 -8.1 3.1 0.2 2.5 1.9 2.1 2.1
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 1.9 0.4 0.2 -3.9 3.6 1.0 0.7 1.6 2.0 2.1
Total factor productivity growth 1.7 0.0 -0.2 -4.7 2.9 0.6 0.3 1.1 1.4 1.5
Growth of capital stock 1.8 2.0 2.0 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
Growth of potential GDP 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.2 1.1 1.0 0.9 1.5 1.8 1.7
Growth of real GDP 3.0 c 1.1 c 1.1 c -4.9 c 2.9 c 1.3 0.9 1.7 2.1 2.2
Growth of real GDP per head 2.8 c 1.0 c 1.1 c -4.9 c 2.8 c 1.3 1.0 1.8 2.1 2.2
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 82.8 82.8 82.8 82.8 82.9 82.9 82.9 82.8 82.7 82.7
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 3,694 3,984 3,895 3,835 4,216 4,283 4,686 5,061 5,373 5,628
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 44,638 48,101 47,025 46,297 50,862 51,676 56,557 61,120 64,928 68,052
Private consumption (US$ bn) 1,924 2,071 2,021 1,947 2,088 2,144 2,318 2,500 2,651 2,760
Private consumption per head (US$) 23,255 25,006 24,394 23,502 25,190 25,864 27,978 30,189 32,035 33,374
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 4,392 4,586 4,632 4,551 4,869 5,203 5,420 5,653 5,891 6,151
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 53,072 55,360 55,921 54,937 58,749 62,771 65,422 68,270 71,186 74,374
GDP (€ bn) 3,271 3,372 3,479 3,360 3,562 3,901 4,101 4,235 4,368 4,520
Private consumption (€ bn) 1,704 1,753 1,805 1,706 1,764 1,952 2,029 2,092 2,155 2,217
Personal disposable income (€ bn) 1,846 1,912 1,970 1,983 2,037 2,144 2,224 2,280 2,341 2,402
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 2,085 2,259 2,205 2,263 2,411 2,355 2,540 2,724 2,879 2,991
Growth of real disposable income (%) 1.9 2.1 1.7 0.0 -0.3 -1.9 0.7 0.8 1.0 0.9
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 1.10 1.10 1.09 1.08 1.07 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.02
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 4.60 4.68 4.50 4.57 4.46 4.29 4.43 4.52 4.55 4.60
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 3.65 3.59 3.48 3.47 3.37 3.31 3.24 3.20 3.17 3.20
Share of world exports of goods (%) 8.19 8.03 7.92 7.95 7.45 7.84 7.98 8.29 8.32 9.13
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 44.1 44.3 44.9 51.0 51.6 48.0 46.0 45.5 45.3 45.1
Interest 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.6 0.6 0.6 1.0 1.3 1.5 1.5
Non-interest 43.1 43.3 44.1 50.3 51.0 47.4 45.0 44.2 43.8 43.5
Government revenue 45.5 46.2 46.4 46.6 47.9 44.8 44.5 45.2 45.2 45.1
Budget balance 1.3 1.9 1.5 -4.3 -3.7 -3.2 -1.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1
Primary balance 2.4 2.8 2.3 -3.7 -3.1 -2.5 -0.5 1.0 1.4 1.6
Government debt 64.5 61.2 58.8 68.9 69.5 69.7 67.8 66.0 64.1 61.9
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.14 1.20 1.23 1.25
Exchange rate US$:€ (year-end) 1.20 1.15 1.12 1.23 1.13 1.12 1.18 1.22 1.24 1.25
Exchange rate ¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 132.7 142.6 149.3 146.9 146.6
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 94.8 c 97.0 c 95.5 c 96.7 c 97.6 c 97.0 98.3 98.9 98.7 98.4
Purchasing power parity €:US$ (av) 0.74 0.74 0.75 0.74 0.73 0.75 0.76 0.75 0.74 0.73
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 4.5 4.8 4.6 8.4 5.6 4.4 8.5 6.8 6.6 6.9
Domestic credit growth (%) -0.2 1.6 9.3 7.4 2.1 0.5 4.6 2.7 2.2 1.9
Lending rate (av; %) 1.7 1.7 1.4 1.1 1.1 1.4 2.7 3.2 3.2 3.2
Deposit rate (av; %) 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.3 1.6 2.1 2.1 2.1
Short-term interest rate (av; %) -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.3 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
Long-term interest rate (av; %) 0.4 0.4 -0.2 -0.5 -0.3 0.8 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 43.1 43.2 43.5 43.4 43.0 42.9 43.0 42.9 42.8 42.5
Labour force (% change) 0.6 0.3 0.7 -0.3 -1.0 -0.1 0.1 -0.2 -0.3 -0.6
Employment (m) 41.5 41.8 42.2 41.7 41.4 41.5 41.6 41.7 41.7 41.8
Employment (% change) 1.0 0.7 0.9 -1.0 -0.7 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1
Unemployment (m; national measure) 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.7 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.2 1.1 0.8
Unemployment rate (%; EU/OECD standardised measure) 3.8 3.4 3.2 3.9 3.6 3.4 3.4 3.2 3.1 3.0
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
Consumer price inflation (EU harmonised measure) 1.7 1.9 1.4 0.4 3.2 7.7 3.3 2.1 1.9 1.9
Producer prices (av) 2.4 2.6 1.3 -0.8 9.7 26.0 3.7 2.1 2.1 2.0
GDP deflator (av) 1.5 2.0 2.1 1.6 3.0 8.1 4.2 1.5 1.1 1.3
Private consumption deflator (av) 1.5 1.5 1.3 0.6 3.1 7.2 2.9 1.7 1.7 1.7
Government consumption deflator (av) 2.2 2.4 2.2 3.3 3.0 9.6 4.2 3.1 2.9 2.9
Fixed investment deflator (av) 2.1 2.9 2.8 1.4 5.0 8.0 2.1 0.0 0.0 0.0
Hourly wages (whole economy, nominal) 2.3 3.0 2.8 2.0 1.6 3.9 3.6 2.7 2.7 2.7
Hourly wages (whole economy, real) 0.5 1.0 1.4 1.6 -1.6 -3.5 0.3 0.6 0.8 0.8
Unit labour costs (€-based; av) 1.3 3.4 3.5 5.1 0.7 5.4 3.8 1.1 1.7 1.6
Unit labour costs (% change; US$) 3.4 8.2 -1.9 7.1 4.5 -2.2 8.0 5.7 4.7 2.9
Labour costs per hour (€) 40.2 c 41.4 c 42.6 c 43.5 c 44.2 c 45.9 47.5 48.8 50.1 51.5
Labour costs per hour (US$) 45.5 c 49.0 c 47.7 c 49.6 c 52.3 c 50.4 54.3 58.3 61.7 64.1
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 288.5 317.0 294.4 274.2 314.1 270.5 294.2 319.4 345.3 365.5
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 7.8 8.0 7.6 7.2 7.5 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.5
Goods: exports fob 1,419.9 1,524.8 1,459.8 1,356.9 1,616.8 1,929.9 2,054.3 2,213.1 2,343.3 2,468.3
Goods: imports fob -1,131.9 -1,261.5 -1,218.6 -1,138.9 -1,388.5 -1,697.4 -1,790.5 -1,926.2 -2,045.5 -2,144.3
Trade balance 288.1 263.3 241.3 218.0 228.2 232.6 263.9 286.9 297.8 324.1
Services: credit 321.6 356.8 356.2 318.7 386.7 399.7 442.7 480.0 523.5 564.0
Services: debit -349.0 -375.4 -376.3 -315.6 -386.0 -425.1 -459.5 -503.2 -551.5 -596.0
Services balance -27.4 -18.6 -20.1 3.1 0.7 -25.4 -16.9 -23.2 -27.9 -32.0
Primary income: credit 234.7 284.6 267.6 235.2 277.8 241.6 268.4 281.9 299.6 323.2
Primary income: debit -149.5 -153.1 -138.5 -121.7 -128.7 -121.6 -168.3 -178.8 -184.4 -208.0
Primary income balance 85.2 131.5 129.1 113.5 149.1 120.0 100.1 103.0 115.2 115.2
Secondary income: credit 75.2 82.3 90.2 95.3 107.9 109.6 119.9 129.5 137.5 144.0
Secondary income: debit -132.4 -141.6 -146.0 -155.8 -171.8 -166.3 -172.8 -176.8 -177.3 -185.8
Secondary income balance -57.2 -59.3 -55.8 -60.5 -63.9 -56.6 -52.9 -47.3 -39.8 -41.7
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 90.2 95.5 91.0 92.1 100.9 117.7 122.4 126.6 129.4 131.3
Export prices (% change) 3.9 5.9 -4.8 1.2 9.5 16.7 4.0 3.4 2.2 1.4
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 86.3 92.5 86.9 84.7 99.7 116.4 117.6 122.0 126.5 129.4
Import prices (% change) 5.9 7.2 -6.1 -2.5 17.6 16.8 1.0 3.7 3.7 2.3
Terms of trade (2010=100) 104.5 103.2 104.7 108.7 101.2 101.0 104.1 103.8 102.3 101.5
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 5.6 3.8 1.6 -5.3 9.7 4.6 4.0 3.2 3.3 3.4
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment 109.5 166.9 71.7 142.8 73.7 72.9 89.4 103.3 121.2 138.2
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 3.0 4.2 1.8 3.7 1.7 1.7 1.9 2.0 2.3 2.5
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 14.5 19.9 8.6 17.1 8.0 7.7 8.7 9.4 10.5 11.5
Outward direct investment -145.8 -195.9 -156.6 -138.6 -193.7 -134.2 -141.6 -130.5 -139.8 -149.7
Net foreign direct investment -36.3 -29.0 -84.9 4.2 -120.0 -61.3 -52.2 -27.2 -18.6 -11.5
Stock of foreign direct investment 1,716.0 1,755.5 1,779.5 2,107.0 2,037.4 2,110.3 2,199.7 2,303.0 2,424.2 2,562.4
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 20,737 21,193 21,483 25,436 24,581 25,460 26,550 27,814 29,296 30,984
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 46.5 44.1 45.7 54.9 48.3 49.3 46.9 45.5 45.1 45.5
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 5.38 42.65 6.93 14.10 6.59 5.95 6.97 7.75 8.75 9.61
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 5.72 5.48 5.20 6.30 5.52 5.21 5.19 5.23 5.30 5.39
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data refer to historic data. Source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU
Global data OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: Economist Intelligence Unit aggregate
OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent average import price
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IFS
EUR 3-month interbank rate: Bundesbank
Domestic data GDP growth and component: Eurostat
Consumer prices: Federal Statistical Office
Average hourly earnings in manufacturing: Bundesbank
Exchange rates and interest rates: IFS
Population: UN
Industrial production: Bundesbank
General government financial balance: Eurostat
Abbreviations IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows the EIU to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by the EIU for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2017-21) and from EIU assessments for the forecast period (2022-26). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by the EIU for 2017-21. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2022-26 are based on EIU assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; the EIU, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2017-21 ranges are then used to derive 2022-26 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2022-26, not to the likely situation in 2026 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2019 or 2024). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2017-21   2022-26  
  Germany Regional average a Germany Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 5 4.6 5 4.3
  2. Risk of social unrest 5 4.1 4 3.8
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 5 4.8 5 4.8
  4. Government and opposition 5 4.2 5 4.0
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 4 4.1 4 4.0
  6. International disputes or tensions 4 3.9 3 3.1
  7. Government policy towards business 4 3.9 4 3.7
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 4 3.6 4 3.6
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 4 3.7 5 3.9
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 5 3.9 5 4.1
 11. Efficiency of legal system 5 3.8 5 3.9
 12. Corruption 4 3.9 5 4.0
 13. Impact of crime 4 4.2 4 4.2
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 5 4.9 4 4.4
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 4 3.9 4 3.8
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 3 2.7 3 2.8
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 5 4.5 4 3.7
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 5 4.4 5 4.4
  6. Quality of policymaking 4 3.7 4 4.1
  7. Institutional underpinnings 5 4.6 5 4.7
  8. Asset prices 3 2.3 3 2.6
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 5 4.0 5 4.2
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 5 4.9 5 5.0
  3. Real GDP growth* 1 1.9 2 2.6
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 5 3.7 5 3.7
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 1 1.8 2 2.1
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 2 1.7 2 2.3
  7. The natural resource endowment* 5 3.3 5 3.3
  8. Profitability* 1 2.2 3 3.0
  9. Regional integration 5 4.8 5 4.7
 10. Proximity to markets 5 4.7 5 4.2
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 5 4.7 5 4.8
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 3 3.8 3 4.1
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 5 3.9 5 4.0
  4. Promotion of competition 4 3.7 4 3.7
  5. Protection of intellectual property 5 4.5 5 4.6
  6. Price controls 4 4.1 4 4.0
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 4 3.3 4 3.4
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 4 3.7 4 3.6
  9. Minority shareholders 4 4.2 4 4.2
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 4 4.2 3 3.6
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 4 3.8 4 3.8
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 5 4.8 5 4.9
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 5 4.6 5 4.6
  5. Government favouritism 4 3.9 3 3.4
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 5 4.8 5 4.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 5 4.4 5 4.2
  3. Ease of trading* 5 4.6 4 4.2
  4. Openness of trade* 5 4.5 5 4.7
  5. Restrictions on the current account 5 4.9 5 5.0
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 4 4.3 4 4.5
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 3 2.7 3 2.8
  3. Value-added tax* 3 2.4 3 2.3
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 3 2.8 3 2.7
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 4 3.6 4 3.8
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 4 3.8 4 3.8
  7. Tax complexity 4 3.4 4 3.4
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 3 2.9 4 3.3
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 5 4.5 5 4.6
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 3 3.2 5 3.6
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 5 4.4 5 4.3
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 5 4.3 5 4.6
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 4 3.4 4 3.9
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 2 2.6 2 2.6
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 5 4.5 5 4.6
  3. Quality of workforce* 4 3.9 4 3.9
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 5 4.3 5 4.4
  5. Health of the workforce* 5 4.9 5 5.0
  6. Level of technical skills 5 4.2 5 4.1
  7. Cost of living* 4 3.0 4 3.2
  8. Incidence of strikes* 4 3.7 4 3.9
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 3 3.2 3 3.4
 10. Extent of wage regulation 3 3.4 3 3.3
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 4 3.8 4 3.7
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 3 4.2 4 4.6
  2. Broadband connection speed* 5 4.6 5 4.6
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 5 4.3 5 4.5
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 4 4.6 4 4.6
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 4 3.8 4 3.8
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 5 4.2 5 4.2
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 5 4.4 5 4.6
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 4 4.2 5 4.4
  9. Rents of office space* 1 1.7 1 1.6
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 5 4.4 5 4.2
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 5 4.7 5 4.8
  3. Scope of e-government* 4 4.3 5 4.6
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 4 4.5 4 4.1
  5. Internet use* 5 4.7 5 4.9
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 3 2.7 3 2.4
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 5 4.3 5 4.6
  8. Research infrastructure* 5 4.4 5 4.3
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

Subject: Economic conditions; Productivity; Political parties; International trade; Population growth; Growth rate; Democracy; Immigration; Tax rates; Local elections; Energy industry; Foreign exchange rates; Labor force; Pandemics; Consumption; Purchasing power parity; Supply chains; Capital expenditures; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Automobile industry; Cost control; Recessions; Russia-Ukraine War

Business indexing term: Subject: Economic conditions Productivity International trade Tax rates Energy industry Foreign exchange rates Labor force Consumption Purchasing power parity Supply chains Capital expenditures Gross Domestic Product--GDP Automobile industry Cost control Recessions; Industry: 33611 :‎ Automobile and Light Duty Motor Vehicle Manufacturing 81394 :‎ Political Organizations

Location: Germany; Western Europe

Company / organization: Name: Democratic Party; NAICS: 813940

Classification: 33611: Automobile and Light Duty Motor Vehicle Manufacturing; 81394: Political Organizations

Identifier / keyword: Germany; Western Europe

Title: Country Forecast Germany June 2022

Publication title: Country Forecast. Germany; New York

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09669388

e-ISSN: 20489331

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2714191088

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-germany-june-2022/docview/2714191088/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Romania June 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-romania-june-2022/docview/2748932903/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Romania&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Romania+June+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-14&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Romania&amp;rft.issn=13564102&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Romania; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Romania; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Romania June 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Romania; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13564102

e-ISSN: 20475713

Source type: Report

Languageof publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2748932903

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-romania-june-2022/docview/2748932903/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-12-11

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report United Kingdom June 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-united-kingdom-june-2022/docview/2745703366/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+United+Kingdom&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+United+Kingdom+June+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-08&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+United+Kingdom&amp;rft.issn=02695472&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Western Europe; United Kingdom--UK

Identifier / keyword: United Kingdom; Western Europe

Title: Country Report United Kingdom June 2022

Publication title: Country Report. United Kingdom; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695472

e-ISSN: 20476027

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2745703366

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-united-kingdom-june-2022/docview/2745703366/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2023-12-01

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Colombia June 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-colombia-june-2022/docview/2745539579/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Colombia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Colombia+June+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-07&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Colombia&amp;rft.issn=02697157&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Colombia; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Colombia; Latin America

Title: Country Report Colombia June 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Colombia; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02697157

e-ISSN: 20474547

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2745539579

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-colombia-june-2022/docview/2745539579/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-12-04

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Morocco June 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-morocco-june-2022/docview/2745246328/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Morocco&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Morocco+June+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-06&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Morocco&amp;rft.issn=02696126&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Morocco; Africa

Identifier / keyword: Morocco; Africa

Title: Country Report Morocco June 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Morocco; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02696126

e-ISSN: 20475365

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2745246328

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-morocco-june-2022/docview/2745246328/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-12-03

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Libya 2nd Quarter 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-libya-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2745246327/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Libya&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Libya+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-06&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Libya&amp;rft.issn=02694328&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Libya; Africa

Identifier / keyword: Libya; Africa

Title: Country Report Libya 2nd Quarter 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Libya; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02694328

e-ISSN: 20475195

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2745246327

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-libya-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2745246327/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-12-03

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Bolivia June 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-bolivia-june-2022/docview/2745246326/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Bolivia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Bolivia+June+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-06&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Bolivia&amp;rft.issn=13564072&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Bolivia; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Bolivia; Latin America

Title: Country Report Bolivia June 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Bolivia; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13564072

e-ISSN: 20474407

Source type: Report

Language ofpublication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2745246326

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-bolivia-june-2022/docview/2745246326/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-12-03

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Solomon Islands 2nd Quarter 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-solomon-islands-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2745246325/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;rft.genre=report&amp;rft.jtitle=&amp;rft.atitle=&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-06&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=Country+Report+Solomon+Islands+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.title=Country+Report+Solomon+Islands+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.issn=&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Solomon Islands; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: Solomon Islands; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Solomon Islands 2nd Quarter 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Solomon Islands; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

e-ISSN: 20475535

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2745246325

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-solomon-islands-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2745246325/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-12-03

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Ireland June 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-ireland-june-2022/docview/2740394175/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Ireland&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Ireland+June+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Ireland&amp;rft.issn=02695278&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Ireland; Western Europe

Identifier / keyword: Ireland; Western Europe

Title: Country Report Ireland June 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Ireland; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695278

e-ISSN: 20475047

Source type: Report

Languageof publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2740394175

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-ireland-june-2022/docview/2740394175/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Poland June 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-poland-june-2022/docview/2740393524/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Poland&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Poland+June+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Poland&amp;rft.issn=02696193&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Poland; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Poland; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Poland June 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Poland; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02696193

e-ISSN: 20475640

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2740393524

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-poland-june-2022/docview/2740393524/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Fiji 2nd Quarter 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-fiji-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2740393449/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;rft.genre=report&amp;rft.jtitle=&amp;rft.atitle=&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-06-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=Country+Report+Fiji+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.title=Country+Report+Fiji+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.issn=&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Fiji; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: Fiji; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Fiji 2nd Quarter 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Fiji; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jun 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

e-ISSN: 20475500

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2740393449

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-fiji-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2740393449/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Taiwan May 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-taiwan-may-2022/docview/2735708073/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Taiwan&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Taiwan+May+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-18&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Taiwan&amp;rft.issn=0269672X&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Taiwan; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: Taiwan; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Taiwan May 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Taiwan; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 0269672X

e-ISSN: 20475896

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2735708073

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-taiwan-may-2022/docview/2735708073/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Venezuela May 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-may-2022/docview/2714193586/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Economic outlook 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 8.0 22.2 6.3 4.2 2.5 2.2 Consumer price inflation (av, %) 1,589 124 51.8 44.5 40.7 39.3 Budget balance (% of GDP) -4.5 -3.8 -3.6 -3.6 -3.3 -3.3 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.6 3.1 2.6 2.3 2.3 2.2 3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 238.6 63.8 50.8 45.0 42.0 40.0 Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (av) 3.23 4.6 5.8 8.3 13.3 23.2 Although the implementation of piecemeal liberalisation measures will help to foster a semblance of macroeconomic stability, the overall business environment will remain dismal. Demographic outlook Population (m) 2016 2021 2026 Total 30.8 29.0 27.9 Male 15.3 14.2 13.8 Female 15.5 14.7 14.1 Period averages (%) 2017-21 2022-26 Population growth -1.2 -0.7 Working-age population growth -1.1 -0.8 Labour force growth -5.3 0.5 Venezuela's population has declined in recent years, as the political and economic crisis has led to outward migration. Long-term outlook 2022-30 2031-50 2022-50 Growth and productivity (% change; annual av) Growth of real GDP per head 5.2 1.9 2.9 Growth of real GDP 4.7 3.5 3.9 Labour productivity growth 2.9 1.0 1.5 Assuming that international oil prices remain supportive, we expect Venezuela's recovery to continue over the medium term. Fact sheet Annual data 2021a Historical averages (%) 2017-21 Population (m) 29.0 Population growth -1.2 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 70.0 Real GDP growth -20.9 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 134.0 Real domestic demand growth -19.7 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 2,416 Inflation 4,833.3 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,625 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.9 Exchange rate (av) BsD:US$ 3.2b FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.2 a EIU estimates. b Actual.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Venezuela+May+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-15&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=09669574&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - Despite its role in fomenting Venezuela's deep socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis, EIU expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela, to retain power throughout the 2022-26 forecast period. Mr Maduro's position will be supported primarily by his grip over a complex security apparatus and the opposition's lack of de facto power. The Maduro regime has managed internal dissent through a patronage system that rewards loyalty, as well as through its strict control over the security forces. Mr Maduro's biggest political challenge will be in the foreign policy arena: he will struggle to balance his backing of Russia (following that country's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022) with his attempts to foment a potential rapprochement with the US with a view to obtaining sanctions relief.

Venezuela--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
2.93 3.44 82 81 12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

- Our business environment rankings (BER) model puts Venezuela among the world's least attractive investment locations for both the historical period (2017-21) and the forecast period (2022-26). Even though its score rises modestly in the forecast period-mainly reflecting improvements in political stability and the macroeconomic environment-Venezuela is only saved from placing last among the 82 countries covered in our rankings by the significant deterioration in Ukraine's score as a result of that country's invasion by Russia. Government policy deters foreign investment through complex regulations, a heavy tax burden and a weak commitment to creating a level playing field. Mr Maduro has indicated a greater acceptance of private (including foreign) investment, but the country's structural problems will go unaddressed. In view of these factors and US sanctions, the investment climate will remain extremely difficult.

Venezuela--highlights: Economic outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 8.0 22.2 6.3 4.2 2.5 2.2
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 1,589 124 51.8 44.5 40.7 39.3
Budget balance (% of GDP) -4.5 -3.8 -3.6 -3.6 -3.3 -3.3
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.6 3.1 2.6 2.3 2.3 2.2
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 238.6 63.8 50.8 45.0 42.0 40.0
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (av) 3.23 4.6 5.8 8.3 13.3 23.2

- Although the implementation of piecemeal liberalisation measures will help to foster a semblance of macroeconomic stability, the overall business environment will remain dismal. The economic recovery will be highly uneven, driven largely by gains in the oil sector. By contrast, mass outward migration, a dearth of private-sector credit, continued US sanctions and weak confidence in the country's legal framework will continue to weigh on the non-oil economy. Weak public confidence in underlying policymaking means that the government will struggle to resolve the vestiges of hyperinflation and depression, such as an incomplete process of dollarisation.

Venezuela--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2016 2021 2026
Total 30.8 29.0 27.9
 Male 15.3 14.2 13.8
 Female 15.5 14.7 14.1
Period averages (%)   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth   -1.2 -0.7
Working-age population growth   -1.1 -0.8
Labour force growth   -5.3 0.5

- Venezuela's population has declined in recent years, as the political and economic crisis has led to outward migration. More than 6m Venezuelans are estimated to have left since 2014, accounting for the population declines in the historical period. We forecast that mass outward migration will continue in the forecast period (albeit at a slower pace), given persistent goods shortages and the lack of job opportunities. As many of those who leave are of working age, the old-age dependency ratio will rise. The ratio will remain low by developed-country standards, but population ageing will put growing pressure on the heavily indebted social security system, particularly in a context of volatile public finances.

Venezuela--highlights: Market opportunities   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 70.0 122.0 160.0 162.5 145.0 118.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 2,416 4,242 5,606 5,736 5,157 4,229
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 49.6 96.1 127.2 136.4 125.3 102.7
Household consumption (US$ bn) 44.5 89.1 117.9 125.5 113.6 91.2
Household consumption per head (US$) 1,540 3,100 4,130 4,430 4,040 3,270

- The Venezuelan economy will recover only gradually from the damage incurred during the country's deep socioeconomic crisis. Even at the end of our forecast period, real GDP will be just one-third of its 2013 peak. Acute economic inequality will limit opportunities in the consumer market. Although Venezuela is generously endowed with natural resources, extremely challenging conditions will keep private-sector investment well below potential.

Venezuela--highlights: Long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 5.2 1.9 2.9
Growth of real GDP 4.7 3.5 3.9
Labour productivity growth 2.9 1.0 1.5

- Assuming that international oil prices remain supportive, we expect Venezuela's recovery to continue over the medium term. An ongoing oil boom will help to lift real GDP growth to an average of 5.2% in 2022-30. However, this improvement comes from a low base of comparison, and we expect growth to slow to about 3.5% in 2031-50. Our forecasts assume that capital and labour will be the main contributors to growth (as both the skills base and capital stock are gradually rebuilt). However, productivity growth will prove disappointing, as structural barriers will impede the rapid adoption of new technologies.

Fact sheet Annual data 2021 a Historical averages (%) 2017-21
Population (m) 29.0 Population growth -1.2
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 70.0 Real GDP growth -20.9
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 134.0 Real domestic demand growth -19.7
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 2,416 Inflation 4,833.3
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,625 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.9
Exchange rate (av) BsD:US$ 3.2 b FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.2
a EIU estimates. b Actual.
Background: From 1958 until the mid-1990s, two parties-Acción Democrática and the Comité de Organización Política Electoral Independiente-alternated in power. Frequent economic crises and endemic corruption eventually led to a collapse in support for both parties and culminated in the 1998 election of Hugo Chávez, a former lieutenant-colonel and leader of a failed coup in 1992. Mr Chávez's policy programme exacerbated political polarisation, but several attempts to remove him from power before his death in March 2013 proved unsuccessful. His chosen successor, Nicolás Maduro, has seen his own popularity plummet, as his macroeconomic mismanagement-aggravated by wide-ranging US sanctions-has plunged the country into a state of economic collapse.
Political structure: Although Venezuela is nominally a federal republic with separation of powers, the ruling Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV) has systematically eroded institutions. In December 2015 the opposition coalition, Mesa de la Unidad Democrática, won control of the unicameral National Assembly. In January 2016 the politicised Supreme Court declared the legislature to be in contempt of court, blocking all subsequent legislation. In August 2017 a PSUV-only Constituent Assembly (ANC) granted itself control over all legislative matters, becoming the country's de facto legislature and sidelining the National Assembly. The ANC was dissolved at end-2020, after the PSUV and its allies regained control of the legislature in an election that was widely regarded as rigged.
Policy issues: Following a deep depression in 2014-20, the most pressing policy issue is the need to curb macroeconomic volatility and promote economic recovery. The monetisation of vast public deficits created an ever-increasing excess of domestic currency, triggering hyperinflation. Concurrently, mismanagement of PDVSA (the state-owned oil company and originator of almost all foreign-currency inflows into the country) caused a sharp contraction in oil production. Attempts to address these problems through distortionary price and currency controls proved actively counter-productive. Meanwhile, the scarcity of hard currency led to arrears on most of the external debt issued by the sovereign and state-owned firms. The Maduro regime is now changing tack and pursuing incremental pro-market reforms, but its efforts are hindered by hugely distortionary economic imbalances, a lack of confidence in the legal framework and wide-ranging US sanctions.
Taxation: The top corporate tax rate is 34% for non-oil companies and 50% for oil firms. The value-added tax (VAT) rate stands at 16%.
Foreign trade: EIU estimates that the goods trade surplus fell to US$10.7bn in 2019, amid a long-term decline in oil exports. We estimate that the trade account shifted to a US$1.9bn deficit in 2020, before returning to a small surplus in 2021.
Major exports 2018 % of total Major imports 2013 % of total
Petroleum 88.7 Intermediate goods 56.5
Other 11.3 Capital goods 24.2
    Consumer goods 19.3
       
Leading markets 2019 % of total Leading suppliers 2019 % of total
China 19.3 China 31.2
UAE 13.8 US 18.7
Netherlands Antilles 5.4 Brazil 7.8
Aruba 2.1 India 6.4
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance The ruling party, originally called the Movimiento V República, has been in power since 1999 and transformed into the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV) in 2006. The populist-nationalist PSUV was initially led by the late president, Hugo Chávez (1999-2013). Since Mr Chávez's death, the party has been led by Nicolás Maduro. While in power PSUV has wielded practically uncontested authority, initially owing to Mr Chávez's immense popularity and later through electoral manipulation and systematic campaigns to disenfranchise opposition parties and exclude them from state institutions. Mr Maduro is currently serving his second consecutive presidential term, which is due to end in January 2025. However, his legitimacy is contested, given that he won re-election in 2018 in polls that were neither free nor fair. In 2019, in the absence of a "constitutionally elected" president, Juan Guaidó, leader of the opposition Plataforma Unitaria (PU) coalition, declared himself caretaker president. A number of Latin American countries and the US recognise Mr Guaidó as the rightful president, but de facto power still rests with the PSUV. Following a sham legislative election in 2020, the PSUV obtained a supermajority of 219 seats in the 277-member unicameral National Assembly. The main opposition in the legislature is the Alianza Democrática, a group comprising 25 different parties.

Seats in the National Assembly, 2021
(Number of seats)
PSUV 219
PSUV allies 34
Alianza Democrática 20
Others 4
Total 277
Source: EIU.
Political outlook: Political stability EIU expects Mr Maduro's civic-military regime to remain in power throughout the 2022-26 forecast period, despite its role in fomenting the country's ongoing socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis. Several factors underpin our forecast; particularly significant is the regime's strict control over the military, the police and paramilitary forces. This control, which depends on a patronage structure that rewards high-ranking officials and a disciplinary system that severely punishes insubordination, will allow the regime to manage internal dissent.
Having consolidated power over the years, the PSUV has unchecked authority over all branches of government. Mr Guaidó claims to be the legitimate leader but lacks de facto power. He does have the backing of most Western countries, including the US, which he has used to co-ordinate a "maximum pressure" campaign (involving wide-ranging economic sanctions) against the Maduro regime. However, with these hardline tactics failing to deliver results, domestic support for Mr Guaidó has waned. As a result, he is now changing tack and looking to restart political negotiations with the regime that were suspended in October 2021. However, the asymmetry in incentives and bargaining power between the sides-along with deep mutual distrust-will hamper the prospect of a major breakthrough in the long-running deadlock.
In the near term, the regime's main political challenges will be those of its own making, rather than those posed by the political opposition. Having come to power on the promise of a "socialist revolution", Mr Maduro is having to embrace more market-friendly policies to revive the economy. However, this shift has met with resistance from ideological hardliners within the regime. In his efforts to sideline the old guard of the PSUV, Mr Maduro is elevating pragmatic party figures, such as the governor of Carabobo, Rafael Lacava, and the foreign minister, Félix Plasencia. Although Mr Maduro is likely to carve out power quotas for a new generation of PSUV leaders, he will do so carefully and only to the extent that it does not threaten his monopoly over the party apparatus.
Another challenge facing the Maduro regime will be to bring a precarious security situation under control. As institutional corruption has risen over the years, the regime has forged pacts with various armed groups, either out of political convenience or to tap new, illicit revenue streams. However, several of these agreements have since broken down, leading to violent turf wars across Venezuela. Although these armed groups lack the resources to challenge the regime outright, they will undermine the enforcement of law and order.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness Venezuela will continue to suffer in 2022-26 from the weakest political and institutional framework in the region. Over two decades of PSUV rule have engendered low institutional effectiveness and high levels of corruption, largely owing to the centralisation of power within the executive branch. Questions about the credibility of the country's institutions, and about a lack of accountability and transparency, will remain. Extensive corruption and clientelism in the provision of welfare schemes will also limit political and policy effectiveness. Similarly, PDVSA (the state-owned oil company) is an enormous source of direct and indirect profits for regime insiders and will continue to be run by army personnel, rather than by technocrats.
Drug-trafficking will remain a cause for concern, as criminal networks are well established in the country. US authorities have repeatedly accused high-ranking military and civilian government members of drug-trafficking (those accused deny the allegations). Another worrisome issue is the high rate of violent crime. According to the latest internationally comparable data produced by the UN Office on Drugs and Crime, Venezuela had the seventh-highest homicide rate in the world in 2018, at 37 per 100,000 population. Aside from homicides, there have been numerous high-profile kidnappings for ransom in urban areas, which has increased concerns about corruption and mismanagement in the police. This rise in criminality will continue unless measures are adopted to improve the competence and effectiveness of law enforcement agencies and the criminal justice system, reduce impunity and boost youth employment.
Even in the event of a political transition (not our baseline forecast), there would be little progress on addressing these shortcomings within our outlook period, as approving numerous structural frameworks and eliminating inherent vested interests would require considerable political capital, which would probably be in short supply. A new government would be constrained on the one hand by public calls to punish corruption in the Maduro administration, and on the other hand by the practical need to keep at least some of the more pragmatic PSUV regime members and bureaucrats (who have controlled public institutions for decades) onside. A political transition could exacerbate existing problems such as violent crime, which is currently being fuelled by corruption in the judiciary and law enforcement bodies. The issue could be aggravated further by attempts by a future government to disband the colectivos (armed pro-PSUV civilian groups), as they would probably continue to operate as armed criminal gangs under a future government.
Political outlook: Election watch The next presidential election is due in 2024, and the next legislative election is due in 2025. Although prospects for free and fair polls remain remote, we nonetheless expect greater electoral participation from the opposition (in the absence of an effective alternative channel through which to effect political change). There is a significant portion of the PU that believes that it can mobilise enough grassroots support to out-manoeuvre and overcome the regime's anti-democratic tactics. However, we believe that the stakes in Venezuela's "winner-takes-all" system are simply too high for the regime to allow a political opening.
Political outlook: International relations In the near term, Venezuela's main foreign policy priority will be to leverage the Russia-Ukraine crisis to its advantage. Mr Maduro initially came out in support of Russia following that country's invasion of Ukraine in an attempt to retain the backing of one of the world's great powers and thereby ensure his regime's survival. However, there are indications that Mr Maduro's calculations are shifting based on economic considerations. The regime will gain little financial support from Russia, as that country's once-hefty footprint in Venezuela's oil industry is now minimal. Meanwhile, incentives for Mr Maduro to distance himself from Russia are growing, particularly as an opportunity is developing for a thawing of US-Venezuela relations. In early March the US administration led by Joe Biden began talks with the Maduro regime over a deal that would ease oil sanctions on Venezuela in exchange for economic and political concessions. This development opens up the possibility of the US seeking to replace Russian hydrocarbon imports with Venezuelan oil.
However, we remain sceptical that an agreement will materialise. First, it will be politically challenging for the Biden administration to relax sanctions on Venezuela without Mr Maduro making substantive commitments to democratic reform (an unlikely prospect). Secondly, the Maduro regime will prioritise its own survival above all else; this ultimately makes an alliance with Russia more reassuring to Mr Maduro than a rapprochement with the US (especially as the US's ultimate diplomatic goal in Venezuela is to facilitate a democratic transition).
Meanwhile, Venezuela will continue to pursue closer ties with China. Although China will remain a major buyer of Venezuelan oil, it is unlikely to provide direct financial assistance (particularly given Venezuela's haphazard compliance with past debt deals with that country). Venezuela will also increase co-operation with Iran, which has provided the regime with significant backing. Iranian assistance has taken various forms in recent months, including intermittent fuel shipments (to alleviate Venezuela's petrol shortages); knowledge-sharing (to evade international sanctions); and technical assistance (to help PDVSA, the Venezuelan state-owned oil firm, to repair its refinery complexes). However, faced with its own economic constraints, Iran will be unable to provide Venezuela with significant long-term financing or investment.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
Overall position 2.93 3.44 82 81 12 12
Political environment 1.3 2.0 82 81 12 12
 Political stability 1.8 2.9 82 77 12 12
 Political effectiveness 1.0 1.3 82 82 12 12
Macroeconomic environment 2.4 3.3 82 82 12 12
Market opportunities 3.1 5.8 78 50 11 4
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 1.3 2.0 82 80 12 12
Policy towards foreign investment 2.8 3.3 80 78 12 12
Foreign trade & exchange controls 4.2 5.5 75 69 11 10
Taxes 4.2 4.1 80 81 12 12
Financing 1.4 1.4 82 82 12 12
The labour market 5.3 5.4 65 72 8 11
Infrastructure 3.3 2.5 78 81 12 12
Technological readiness 3.0 2.7 77 78 12 12
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
EIU's business environment rankings put Venezuela among the world's least attractive investment locations for both the historical period (2017-21) and the forecast period (2022-26). Although its score strengthens modestly in the forecast period-primarily reflecting improvements in political stability and the macroeconomic environment-Venezuela is only saved from placing last among the 82 countries covered in our rankings by the significant deterioration in Ukraine's score as a result of that country's invasion by Russia.
Venezuela's poor score reflects a combination of political conflict, a dismantling of the legal framework for investors, and a corrupt, poorly managed state-led model that hampers private enterprise and competition. The improvement in the overall score in the forecast period reflects piecemeal liberalisation efforts enacted by the government in recent years; an easing of currency and price controls; and an expansion of informal dollarisation and the tightening of fiscal and monetary policy. These measures played a crucial rule in ending a four-year period of hyperinflation (2017-21), easing goods shortages and restoring a modicum of macroeconomic stability.
Nevertheless, Venezuela's economic environment remains highly unstable. The government's desire to maintain political control means that, even though official rhetoric has become more welcoming to private investment (both from domestic and foreign players), policy predictability will be weak and the risk of ad hoc interventionism high in 2022-26. US sanctions, weak respect for contract rights and a dearth of market opportunities will all limit inbound foreign capital. Physical infrastructure will remain in a dire state and will deteriorate further as the cash-strapped government fails to make necessary investments in the transport network and in the water and electricity systems. The labour market will continue to suffer from outmigration and the loss of skilled labour, given that more than 6m Venezuelans have left the country since 2014.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Venezuela's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: Government relaxes price controls further. Corruption and selective application of regulations are common and continue to undermine free competition.
2024-26: Contract rights remain weak, and red tape and ad hoc interventionism continue.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: US sanctions continue to impede government efforts to revive foreign investment.
2024-26: Speculative purchases of Venezuelan assets continue. Intellectual property protection and private property rights remain weak.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: Government stops enforcing most exchange controls, but access to foreign currency remains limited. US sanctions continue to hamper foreign trade.
2024-26: Government extends tariff exemptions on imports in order to address continued domestic goods shortages.
Taxes 2022-23: Government explores options to broaden the tax base, but extremely high informality is a constraining factor.
2024-26: Tax system remains complex and unwieldy, but risk of discriminatory, ad hoc tax measures declines.
Financing 2022-23: Domestic capital markets remain shallow, meaning that only short-term financing is available.
2024-26: Economic adjustments take time to feed through to solid, sustainable growth in credit to the private sector and development of capital markets. Long-term finance remains in short supply.
Labour market 2022-23: Government raises the minimum wage, but labour costs are still low by regional and global standards. Emigration of skilled labour aggravates skills shortages.
2024-26: Labour market rigidities persist despite some increased flexibility in hiring and firing practices.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Underinvestment in water network and electricity grid leads to continued rationing and unpredictable blackouts.
2024-26: Investors remain highly cautious about committing to long-term capital projects. Infrastructure deteriorates even further.
Technological readiness 2022-23: E-government services remain almost non-existent. Telecommunications sector is opened to private investment, but with little interest. Local use of cryptocurrency expands among middle- and high-income households.
2024-26: Limited regulatory capacity and years of underinvestment continue to restrict internet and mobile coverage.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
2.4 3.3 82 82 12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Venezuela's macroeconomic environment ranks as the least attractive across all 82 countries covered in our rankings in the historical and forecast periods. However, the underlying score for this aspect rises in the forecast period, as a return to GDP growth in 2021 (after a six-year depression in 2014-20) and higher global oil prices will support the economy. Nevertheless, despite high headline growth rates, real GDP will still be just one-third of its pre-crisis level in 2026. The country's economic crisis has resulted in years of underinvestment in the oil industry, which will constrain oil output to a meagre 766,000 barrels/day in 2022 and 940,000 b/d in 2026-well below the average of 2.5m b/d in 2013. Furthermore, wide-ranging US sanctions will limit the ability of PDVSA, the state-owned oil company, to capitalise on the current higher oil price environment. Those sanctions, in addition to deeply rooted corruption and weak private investment also complicate the macroeconomic environment.

- The most significant area of improvement in the score for macroeconomic environment in the forecast period will come in the public finances, as we expect much narrower fiscal deficits. Although the government has not published complete fiscal data since 2011, there is evidence that the fiscal balance has improved significantly following extremely wide deficits over the past decade: we estimate that the deficit narrowed from 31% of GDP in 2018 to 4.5% of GDP in 2021, which suggests an extraordinary pace of consolidation. This consolidation has been driven by a marked reduction in fiscal expenditure, with current expenditure pared back to the bare minimum necessary to maintain the government's system of political patronage. At the same time, fiscal revenue has been bolstered by illicit activities and a recent rise in oil production and prices. In this environment, we expect the fiscal deficit to average 3.5% of GDP in 2022-26. Although the government seems to have recognised the need to reduce deficit monetisation in order to sustain disinflation and engender economic stability, there is nevertheless a risk that it will abandon its commitment to fiscal prudence amid the recent oil price bonanza.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
1.3 2.0 82 80 12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Operating conditions will remain challenging, deterring investors Despite a modest improvement in the score in the forecast period, Venezuela's score for policy towards private enterprise and competition remains extremely weak. The country is still in last place regionally, and the apparent improvement in its global ranking only reflects a three-way tie for last place with Libya and Russia. The improvement in the score primarily reflects the government's piecemeal liberalisation in recent years, in particular with respect to price and currency controls (price controls remain in place but are being enforced less rigorously than in recent years). However, it should be noted that government policy is inconsistent and that a renewed crackdown on retailers who flout the regulations is possible. Capital controls have been relaxed significantly since 2019, and there has been an informal dollarisation of the economy, such that an estimated 50-60% of all transactions are now made in US dollars. This has helped to ease goods shortages and businesses' limited access to hard currency. Although Mr Maduro has hinted that he favours a shift towards privatisation of some state assets in order to bolster the ongoing economic recovery, little concrete progress is likely. Investors will be deterred by the challenging operating conditions and the regime's refusal to alter its underlying approach-characterised by bias against free markets, cronyism and politicised and inefficient institutions. Uncertainty about contract and property rights and the cumbersome burden of government regulation will continue to restrict private businesses' freedom to compete. Given institutional decay in recent years and a significant centralisation of power, improving competition policy (as well as restricting lobbying and addressing corruption) would require an overhaul of regulatory bodies and legal frameworks, which we do not expect to occur in 2022-26.
New legislation signals a shift in policy towards private investment
- Under the former leader, Hugo Chávez (1999-2013), the government nationalised private enterprises run by both domestic and foreign investors, undermined private-property rights and violated contractual agreements, all of which severely constrained private-sector activity. There were far fewer state takeovers under Mr Maduro in the late 2010s, reflecting growing fiscal constraints. Since 2020 there has been a shift in official policy that has involved Mr Maduro adopting an increasingly equivocal approach to private investment, probably reflecting a tacit acknowledgement that productivity at nationalised firms has plummeted and that the hugely overstretched state lacks the resources to reverse this trend. An anti-blockade law passed in October 2020 includes provisions designed to encourage private-sector investment, including in joint operations with public companies. The legislation allows such agreements to be fast-tracked and classified without recourse to a public bidding process, which effectively enables the regime to privatise firms under the radar, without full public disclosure. However, it is unlikely to improve the attractiveness of the Venezuelan market for private investors. The classification of information is designed to provide anonymity to foreign investors-to persuade them that they will be able to circumvent US sanctions-but these will remain a significant deterrent. Even without sanctions, the dire state of the economy and low trust in the government's respect for contract rights would vastly reduce the pool of potential investors (domestic and foreign).

Cronyism and political patronage are set to continue
- Recent efforts at re-privatisation or establishing joint operations have been targeted largely at government insiders or criminal groups linked with the regime, allowing these to derive rents from activities once dominated by the state. This is politically expedient for the regime, as it both raises economic efficiency and ensures the beneficiaries' loyalty. However, this cronyism hampers true competition and tilts the playing field towards individuals or groups favoured by the government, and will therefore keep private investors wary. The government is unlikely to dismantle these systems of patronage or make efforts to reduce corruption as long as its supporters continue to benefit.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
2.8 3.3 80 78 12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Foreign investment will remain scarce Venezuela's score for policy towards foreign investment improves in the forecast period, and it rises by two places in the global rankings. The improvement in the score is due to reduced expropriation risk, given that the government is operating under significant fiscal constraints and has recognised the need for private investment to revive the decimated domestic economy, particularly in the oil sector. Although the 1999 constitution establishes national treatment for foreign capital, the Maduro administration has prioritised investment from firms tied to (or owned by) friendly governments. However, as funding from China has dried up, economic necessity has forced the regime to be less selective about sources of investment. On the face of it, the regime is also open to investment in a greater range of sectors, including industries that were nationalised under Mr Chávez (including oil). However, this is not being matched with policy reforms that would afford foreign investors greater security. Given inconsistent policymaking, a substandard legal framework and US sanctions, we do not believe that Mr Maduro's aim of increasing foreign investment will result in a significant increase in inflows. As the government is in default on its external debt obligations, firms will not be able to access investment protection schemes, adding a further disincentive.
Collecting compensation for nationalisation is a long, tricky process
- The World Bank's International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) is currently considering 13 cases lodged by firms affected by government nationalisation, most of which have dragged on for several years. This will deter foreign investment, particularly as there is little indication that the Maduro regime has the desire or the funds to make compensation payments. ICSID has already concluded 38 cases, but the regime has only agreed payment plans on a limited number of these, and only under threat of seizures in foreign courts. Even this process has been drawn out, with many claimants still pursuing payments from ICSID rulings made in 2015-16. In recent cases the Venezuelan government has argued that US sanctions prohibit payment transfers, but a US federal court rejected that claim in March 2021 in the case of Tenaris, a steel-pipe maker from Luxembourg that is seeking enforcement of a US$234m arbitration award. Firms' ability to collect ICSID compensation has also been complicated by Western governments' recognition of Juan Guaidó as the legitimate Venezuelan president and ICSID's recognition of "parallel representation" of the governments of both Mr Guaidó and Mr Maduro, as it is unclear which government is to be held accountable.
- The government has indicated that it would welcome fresh foreign invest-ment in the oil sector as part of a drive to lift production. This constitutes an acknowledgement that PDVSA is in a critically poor state and is in no position to revive production by itself. Mr Maduro tabled an oil reform bill in 2021 to allow foreign firms to control majority stakes in new projects (foreign investors can currently hold a maximum 40% stake, giving PDVSA effective control), but the reform has not yet received legislative approval. We do not expect any significant foreign investment to materialise while US sanctions are in place.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.2 5.5 75 69 11 10
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
This category is one area of the business environment in which conditions improve slightly, leading to small rises in Venezuela's global and regional rankings. This mainly reflects an easing of exchange-rate controls in 2019; individuals and companies can now buy or sell foreign currency at private and state-run banks, and can use foreign currency for a broader range of daily transactions, which has brought the bolívar closer to its black-market value. Even so, Venezuela still ranks extremely poorly in this area. Although the relaxation of capital controls-along with increased oil export earnings and inflows of workers' remittances from abroad-will help to lift the domestic supply of US dollars, supply will fall short of market demand. Businesses' limited access to hard currency will in turn constrain foreign trade. More generally, trade policy will remain incoherent, and Venezuela will continue to be an unreliable partner, racking up significant debt in unpaid invoices to suppliers. The country has been subject to increasingly tight US sanctions on financial transactions and on its oil trade. Our baseline forecast is that these restrictions will remain in place.

- Informal dollarisation has expanded dramatically in recent years, both for day-to-day cash transactions and in financial transactions (facilitated by the growing use of foreign-currency bank accounts, which are now permitted by the authorities). However, Mr Maduro has welcomed the use of the US dollar only to the extent that it has helped to foster a degree of price and macroeconomic stability. With the country's four-year episode of hyperinflation now behind it, the regime is looking to change tack and promote the use of the bolívar, with a view to facilitating de-dollarisation and regaining monetary autonomy over time. In order to stimulate bolívar demand, authorities have been intervening aggressively in currency markets to lift the purchasing power of the local currency. The government has also introduced a range of ad hoc measures to incentivise use of the bolívar, including the imposition of discriminatory taxes on foreign-currency transactions, local-currency wage rises and increased provision of bolívar-denominated bank credit. In our view, the government's largely improvised plan will weigh on the business environment while doing little to engender confidence in the local currency. Nevertheless, despite the bolívar's weak fundamentals, we do not expect it to be abandoned, as the government's limited access to hard currency (resulting from US sanctions) and questionable commitment to fiscal discipline will deter it from pushing towards fully fledged dollarisation (barring another crisis that involves another round of hyperinflation). On this basis, we expect Venezuela's de facto bi-monetary system to remain in place throughout 2022-26.
- Difficulty in remitting profits earned in Venezuela will remain one of the most significant challenges for foreign companies operating in the country. Official permission is required to remit profits, but critical shortages of foreign exchange mean that remittances face long delays. Many foreign-owned companies have not been able to remit their profits for years.
- In a bid to alleviate domestic goods shortages-resulting in large part from severely diminished domestic productive capacity-the government has recently lowered some import barriers. Since August 2021 more than 3,000 products-spanning the gamut of consumer, intermediate and capital goods-have been exempt from import tariffs and value-added tax (VAT). These tax exemptions are set to expire by end-2022, but we believe that the government is likely to extend them, as domestic firms will not be able to fully make up for imported supplies.
- Foreign trade will continue to suffer from US sanctions. Initially targeted at individuals, sanctions have been ramped up significantly since 2017 such that they also target the country's commercial infrastructure, including its financial and energy sectors. The Russia-Ukraine war has opened the window for a rapprochement between the US and Venezuela, given that the US is seeking replacements for Russian hydrocarbons and that Russia has reduced its support for Venezuela. However, it will be difficult for the US administration, led by Joe Biden, to relax sanctions without the Venezuelan government committing to substantial democratic reform. The tighter oil market may lead to some tinkering around the edges of sanctions. For example, the Biden administration could allow exchanges of oil for basic commodities such as food and medicine. The Biden administration may also consider allowing some oil majors to engage in oil-for-debt operations with PDVSA. However, barring a wholesale lifting of sanctions (which we consider extremely unlikely) foreign investors will remain wary, which will suppress both trade with and investment in Venezuela.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.2 4.1 80 81 12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Improvements in the tax regime are unlikely given fiscal constraints Venezuela's score deteriorates slightly in the forecast period, and the country falls by one place in the global rankings, given that the tax regime will remain a barrier to investment and that fiscal constraints will cause further deterioration in this area. Rates of direct corporate taxation are currently moderate: the top corporate income tax rate is 34% (excluding oil companies, for which the rate is set at 50%), but tax laws, regulations and procedures are complicated, inconsistent and subject to frequent arbitrary adjustments. The system is also extremely complex. Compliance with tax requirements requires businesses to make dozens of separate payments each year, which is hugely time-consuming; Venezuela is about three times worse than the Latin American average in terms of both number of payments and time taken. The tax burden is heavy, accounting for 73% of profits (the regional average is 47%). A series of new taxes introduced in 2009 as part of wider reforms doubled the effective tax rate on earnings in many cases and included new fiscal charges on businesses, some of which are levied on gross revenue rather than net earnings.

- It is difficult to assess exactly how narrow Venezuela's tax base is; according to the latest official data disclosed by the Servicio Nacional Integrado de Administración Aduanera y Tributaria (Seniat, the tax authority), tax income accounted for just 12% of GDP in 2012. We believe that tax collection has fallen considerably since then, given the decimation of the formal sector, the sharp increase in domestic poverty and poor tax compliance. On this basis, we estimate total tax revenue at a meagre 6% of GDP in 2021.
- In March the government expanded the existing financial transactions tax to cover foreign-currency transactions, which are now subject to a minimum tax of 3%, compared with a rate of 2% levied on local-currency transactions. The reform has two core aims: to bolster tax collection and to drum up demand for the bolívar. However, the policy is unlikely to succeed on either front. In our view, the government's ability to administer the policy will be stymied by high levels of informality, tax evasion and the growing proliferation of alternative digital payment methods (such as Zelle and Binance). The endemically corrupt, under-staffed and under-resourced Seniat is unlikely to be up to the task of enforcing the reform. Media reporting indicates that, in the face of technical difficulties and implementation challenges, the vast majority of firms are simply not collecting the tax. However, there is a risk that, in an effort to boost compliance, tax officials will resort to abusive tax collection practices that ultimately aggravate the existing problem of business informality.
- The fiscal regime will do little to encourage new investment in 2022-26. In theory, Venezuela offers both foreign and domestic investors a full and equal range of investment incentives, including tax exemptions, special credit financing and export incentives. The federal government also operates a number of state-run lending institutions that focus on micro, small and medium-sized businesses. The Corporación Venezolana de Guayana, the state industrial-holding company, offers investment incentives, as do many states and municipalities. However, there is no evidence that the Maduro regime is making the benefits of these investment incentives available to businesses.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
1.4 1.4 82 82 12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Financing conditions will remain difficult Venezuela's score and ranking for financing stagnate in the forecast period, and the country remains in last place globally. The banking sector has been decimated, having borne the brunt of government efforts to rein in hyperinflation exclusively through the levers of monetary policy. Although extremely high reserve requirements mandated by the Banco Central de Venezuela (BCV, the central bank) helped to curb growth in the money supply, they led to the near-complete destruction of financial intermediation. As at January 2022 private-sector credit as a share of GDP stood at a meagre 0.3% (from 20% at end-2017 and far below the regional average of almost 60%). What little credit banks provide is mostly in the form of directed lending (mostly to agricultural producers and micro-enterprises) at preferential rates. In the context of greater macroeconomic stability, the BCV will gradually loosen its highly restrictive monetary policy, while also encouraging banks to increase provision of dollar-linked loans. However, without accompanying microeconomic reforms, these moves will not be enough to rebuild the banking sector. Concurrently, as the sovereign is still in default, Venezuelan corporates will remain shut out from international financial markets throughout 2022-26 and financing will therefore continue to be a major weakness of Venezuela's business environment over the forecast period.

- The government will continue to crowd out private-sector financing in 2022-26. Public-sector bonds already account for 55% of total assets in the financial system. This share is likely to rise following the introduction of a new regulation in early May 2022 that provides income tax exemptions for all earnings-including both capital gains and interest income-made from BCV securities. The government has said that the regulation will be temporary and is primarily aimed at absorbing surplus liquidity in the financial system. However, given the government's own financing constraints, it is more likely than not that the measure will be extended into the medium term.
- Despite the abysmal financing environment, the Bolsa de Valores de Caracas (BVC, the Caracas stock exchange) has emerged as a source of debt finance for local companies. However, despite some recent improvement, both the volume of trades and overall market capitalisation (estimated at about 2% of GDP) remain extremely low. Transactions on the BCV must be carried out in bolívares, and companies must submit to regular audits and credit ratings, both of which act as barriers to entry given the increased dollarisation of the economy and high levels of corruption. Even for companies that can meet these requirements and issue debt on the stockmarket, borrowing costs are high and maturity periods short.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.3 5.4 65 72 8 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Large-scale emigration will hamper the labour market in 2022-26 The labour market is one of the strongest areas of Venezuela's business environment, in both the historical and forecast periods. That said, despite a modest rise in the underlying score (stemming from a steep fall in per-unit labour costs), the country loses considerable ground in both the regional and global rankings in 2022-26. This mainly reflects increased skills shortages following the departure of large numbers of Venezuelans in recent years. Few of the skilled Venezuelans who have left the country are likely to return until the economy is on a much firmer footing, if at all. The informal sector is large and employs the vast majority of the country's workers. Venezuela's labour laws were already among the most rigid in the world, even before a highly restrictive labour reform that substantially increased non-wage costs came into effect in 2012. As part of the government's coronavirus response, firms are prohibited from firing workers until December 2022.

- The mass exodus of Venezuelans from the country will be the main factor behind skills shortages and labour market mismatches in the near term. Prospects for remedying these problems even in the medium to long term remain bleak, given a recent deterioration in Venezuela's higher education system. Budget cuts have left public universities and technical colleges woefully underfunded, forcing university administrators to economise by paying educators starvation wages. Despite repeated nominal wage increases, most university professors were earning just US$55-95/month as at March 2022, making them the lowest-paid professors in Latin America. As a result, many educators have moved into other jobs or have left the country. By some estimates, as many as four out of every ten university professors have resigned from their positions since the onset of the country's socioeconomic crisis in 2014. The Maduro government has shown little inclination to address resource shortages at universities, which will not only limit the student intake, but also the quality of education for the foreseeable future.
- Even once current coronavirus-related restrictions (which bar firms from firing workers until the end of 2022) are lifted, the labour market will remain extremely inflexible. Staffing levels (other than for managers, short-term workers and high-income earners) can be reduced only via collective agreement. Many workers cannot be fired at all, even in cases of stealing company property or failing to come to work. In practice, companies looking to shed staff are forced to negotiate "voluntary redundancy" agreements, which typically take the form of extremely generous severance payments that add to employment costs. Employment tribunals are generally hostile to private-sector employers-a factor that workers and union representatives use to their advantage.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
3.3 2.5 78 81 12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Electricity provision will remain a critically weak area of infrastructure Following years of mismanagement and underinvestment, Venezuela's infra-structure has fallen into critical disrepair, and we expect further slippage in 2022-26, causing the country's score and global ranking for infrastructure to deteriorate. Repeated regime pledges to implement ambitious infrastructure projects have come to nothing, and state-funded investment has dried up entirely in recent years. Failure to carry out even routine maintenance and sustain basic service provision manifests itself most obviously in prolonged power shortages and limited access to running water. A combination of fiscal constraints and US sanctions means that it is difficult to attract long-term foreign direct investment (FDI) into capital projects, which will compound the dismal state of the country's infrastructure. Given pervasive corruption in state institutions and the fact that the sovereign remains in default on external debt commitments, multilateral assistance is unlikely to be forthcoming. Even if a new, more market-friendly government took office during the forecast period (which is not our baseline scenario), reversing the long-term underinvestment in infrastructure would take many years.

- Reliable access to electricity will be one of the most significant challenges for businesses operating in Venezuela in 2022-26. Although the country has long faced sporadic power outages, the situation has deteriorated sharply in recent years, occasionally forcing the government to request that workers remain at home while the authorities try to restore power. Some companies have opted to install backup generators, but this is a costly solution that does not solve all operational problems, as it can be difficult to find fuel. The supply of fresh water has been seriously affected, and communication, financial and transport networks have also been interrupted. Insufficient investment in maintaining the generation and transmission systems in recent years are to blame. Water levels at the Guri dam, which generates most of the country's hydropower (which in turn accounts for more than 50% of total electricity generation), have recovered from critically low levels in 2020, but power generation at the dam is considerably lower than the total installed capacity of 24,000 MW, as several transformers are damaged. Even if the government had the requisite funds, overhauling the system would take years, meaning that blackouts and electricity rationing will persist throughout the forecast period.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
3.0 2.7 77 78 12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Venezuela is ill-prepared for technological disruption Venezuela's already-weak technological readiness ranking worsens in 2022-26. The crisis will take its toll on the telecommunications sector, as falls in disposable income will add to a decline in mobile-phone penetration, which stands at about 66% currently, compared with 102% in 2013. Internet penetration has been more stable, at about 60% since 2014, but there are major discrepancies across regions. Given that these areas are crucial drivers of wider technological developments, including mobile apps and cloud computing, declines are important factors in Venezuela's weak score.
A start-up culture is slowly developing but faces hurdles
- In a highly dysfunctional economy still reeling from years of crisis, Venezuela's private sector has increasingly been looking for innovative ways to carve out new market opportunities. This has paved the way for a recent start-up boom in the country. The initial flurry of start-ups focused on e-commerce, food delivery, real-estate services and social media management. However, more recently, start-ups have expanded into financial technology (fintech), by developing new digital wallets and peer-to-peer transfer systems. The government is seeking to support the start-up boom in the hope that it will strengthen the incipient economic recovery. For instance, in November 2021 it passed a new "entrepreneurship law" to provide incentives for start-ups to formalise, including tax exemptions and access to concessional loans. However, major bureaucratic hurdles, logistical constraints and myriad deficiencies in the business environment will limit the effectiveness of the legislation.
- Local use of cryptocurrencies has rocketed in recent years amid declining confidence in the bolívar. Venezuela engages in more cryptocurrency trading relative to its GDP than any other country. As well as its main functions as a store of value and a medium of exchange, cryptocurrency is attractive to Venezuelans because it is virtually impossible for the government to regulate the market. In this context, cryptocurrency adoption is likely to expand in 2022-26. Nonetheless, cryptocurrency will not supersede the US dollar given the volatility of the crypto market.

Economic forecast: Policy trends Policymaking under the regime led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV) will lack credibility and consistency, but EIU still expects an economic recovery to take hold amid an ongoing boom in oil prices. We estimate that, after seven years of deep recession, the Venezuelan economy finally returned to growth in 2021, on the back of slightly higher oil production at PDVSA (the state-owned oil firm). Several factors helped to lift oil output, including fuel shipments from Iran, higher international oil prices and partnerships with local oil service firms. In conjunction with ongoing repairs at PDVSA's main refinery complexes, these factors should support the near-term outlook for the oil industry.
Reviving the non-oil economy will be a much greater challenge. Businesses that have survived years of capital destruction, brain drain, hyperinflation, limited access to finance and suffocating government regulations have done so by adapting their models to the changing circumstances. More often than not, this has involved a downsizing of personnel, increased informality and reduced profitability.
In something of a shift from its previous statist and interventionist approach, the government has been implementing piecemeal economic liberalisation measures over the last few years; it has dismantled most price and currency controls while simultaneously allowing informal dollarisation to expand (about 50-60% of all transactions take place in US dollars). It has also narrowed the fiscal deficit dramatically since 2018. However, these moves were born out of economic necessity, rather than policy conviction. We do not believe that the government will be willing or able to undertake the deep economic and institutional reforms needed to overcome the country's structural deficiencies.
In particular, the government will struggle to resolve problems left over from Venezuela's recent hyperinflationary episode, which lasted from 2017 until 2021. The biggest challenge facing the government will be to address the issue of incomplete dollarisation. The government would ideally like to de-dollarise and regain autonomy over monetary policy. To that end, it has taken ad hoc measures to prop up the exchange rate, lift local-currency wages and impose discriminatory taxes on foreign-currency transactions. However, we remain sceptical that these moves will restore public confidence in the bolívar, and we therefore expect the de facto bi-monetary system to remain in place for the foreseeable future.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Government expenditure 21.0 22.5 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0
Government revenue 16.5 18.7 18.4 18.4 18.7 18.7
Budget balance -4.5 -3.8 -3.6 -3.6 -3.3 -3.3
Government debt 307.0 285.0 255.0 252.0 265.0 275.0
Our forecasts assume that fiscal consolidation will continue in the 2022-26 forecast period on the back of strong revenue gains. However, there are significant risks to this assumption, as soaring oil rents (driven by a tight global energy market) will test the government's commitment to spending restraint.
Assessing the state of the public finances in Venezuela is complicated by the dearth of official statistics, as the government has not published complete data on the fiscal accounts since 2011. Nonetheless, data on monetary aggregates (which are strongly correlated with fiscal trends), anecdotal reports and private-sector calculations all suggest that fiscal policy has tightened dramatically in recent years. We estimate that the budget deficit peaked at 31% of GDP in 2018, before narrowing consistently (and substantially), to 4.5% of GDP in 2021. Adjustment has been driven mainly by expenditure retrenchment, with large cuts to public works, subsidies spending and current transfers. However, the government has struggled to collect revenue amid the near-total destruction of the formal economy. This has forced it to resort to unconventional ways of shoring up state coffers, for example through sales of scrap metal (obtained from stripping down industrial infrastructure) and illicit gold-mining.
Over the rest of the forecast period we expect the pace of fiscal consolidation to slow. Although an ongoing boom in oil prices will bolster government revenue, we expect the government to use a portion of its windfall earnings to lift spending and support the nascent economic recovery. On this basis, we expect the fiscal deficit to narrow only modestly, from 3.8% of GDP in 2022 to 3.3% of GDP in 2026. However, there are considerable risks to our outlook, given the government's poor track record on fiscal prudence.
The public debt/GDP ratio will remain extremely onerous throughout 2022-26, at well over 250%. Moreover, off-balance-sheet debt understates the true size of total public liabilities. The regime will have access to virtually no sources of financing apart from the Banco Central de Venezuela (BCV, the central bank). We expect the majority of funding to come in the form of foreign reserves transfers, as the authorities will remain wary of increasing monetary emission.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Commercial banks' prime rate (av) 9.0 5.0 19.3 23.6 27.8 28.8
The BCV will loosen monetary policy only gradually in 2022-26 as it seeks to keep monetary aggregates under control. In recent years, the central bank has used indirect instruments aggressively to curb bolívar liquidity in the financial system. For instance, the BCV raised the cash reserve ratio (CRR) from 21.5% in late 2018 to 93% in early 2020. Although the central bank has eased the CRR somewhat since that peak, the ratio still stands at an extremely high 73%. We believe that any efforts to relax policy further and rebuild the banking sector will run into hurdles, as they could risk triggering new price pressures. As a result, private-sector credit will not pick up significantly from its current low level (less than 1% of GDP).
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Economic growth (%)
US GDP 5.7 3.0 1.9 1.7 1.9 1.7
OECD GDP 5.2 3.0 2.2 2.0 1.9 1.8
World GDP 5.7 3.3 3.1 2.8 2.6 2.6
World trade 10.5 4.9 4.7 4.0 3.6 3.6
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 4.7 7.2 2.8 2.1 2.1 2.1
OECD CPI 3.6 7.0 3.1 2.3 2.2 2.2
Manufactures (measured in US$) 5.9 1.3 2.3 3.1 2.4 1.9
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 70.4 105.7 89.3 79.0 74.0 68.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 37.9 21.5 -7.2 -6.4 -4.0 -3.1
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.1 1.4 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.1
BsD:US$1 (av) 3.23 4.6 5.8 8.3 13.3 23.2
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP 8.0 22.2 6.3 4.2 2.5 2.2
Private consumption 6.5 25.0 6.2 4.1 3.3 3.2
Government consumption 5.0 20.0 7.0 4.0 3.0 2.0
Gross fixed investment 20.0 40.0 20.0 11.0 2.0 2.0
Exports of goods & services 8.2 23.2 7.4 3.9 2.8 2.7
Imports of goods & services 7.0 31.3 10.9 5.7 4.5 4.0
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 7.6 25.0 7.6 4.7 3.1 2.8
Agriculture 8.5 10.0 5.0 3.0 3.0 3.0
Industry 11.9 35.7 9.6 4.8 3.4 3.3
Services 6.9 19.0 5.3 4.0 2.1 1.8
Venezuela is in the middle of an economic upswing, following a deep depression in 2014-20 (when real GDP contracted by a cumulative 78%). Although a firm oil price environment will create tailwinds for growth, it will not be a panacea for the country's structural deficiencies. We forecast that, even in 2026, the economy will still be only one-third of its size at its peak in 2013.
In the near term, we expect real GDP growth to accelerate from an estimated 8% in 2021 to 22% in 2022. Although this looks like a sharp rebound, it largely reflects a low base of comparison, as opposed to a substantive recovery in economic conditions. As its non-oil economy has now been decimated, Venezuela's economic growth is strongly correlated with oil production and exports, prospects for which have improved. We expect oil output to rise from an estimated average of 565,000 barrels/day in 2021 to 766,000 b/d in 2022. However, this jump will still leave oil output well below its pre-depression level of 2.5m b/d in 2013.
We believe that prospects for increasing output further will run up against capacity constraints. According to OPEC, there are 25 active rigs in the country-no more than a year ago and far fewer than the peak of 95 in early 2012. Moreover, most of these rigs are service rigs, rather than drilling rigs. In order to boost output, PDVSA will need to bring several new drilling rigs online and invest heavily in oil infrastructure. All of this would require large capital infusions, which are highly unlikely to materialise given PDVSA's strained finances and its lack of access to capital markets. Although the company's cash flows will benefit from high oil prices, realised gains will be limited by the price discounts that it must offer buyers as compensation for sanctions risk.
In the medium term, we expect growth to weaken considerably. Serious operational problems, inadequate investment and a limited pool of buyers of Venezuelan crude will cause growth in the oil industry to taper off later in our 2022-26 forecast period. The non-oil economy will strengthen modestly, assuming that recent shifts towards more orthodox policy help to foster macroeconomic stability. However, weak fundamentals and a poor policy environment will keep market opportunities subdued.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends With proven levels surpassing 300bn barrels, Venezuela has the largest oil reserves in the world, making it a major oil producer and exporter. However, the energy sector has suffered from disinvestment and mismanagement owing to political interference. The state is accorded exclusive ownership of PDVSA and its subsidiaries. Since 2007 oil exploration, extraction and storage activities have been reserved for state-owned enterprises or companies in which the state holds a stake of at least 60%.
According to the latest data from the US Energy Information Administration (EIA), Venezuelan oil production is in the midst of a modest upswing following several years of sustained declines. EIA data show that oil output bottomed out at 500,000 b/d in 2020 (the weakest result in 77 years), having fallen from 796,000 b/d in 2019. The decline in output initially reflected severe operational constraints at PDVSA that made it increasingly difficult for the firm to maintain production, let alone invest in exploration in order to lift future capacity. However, PDVSA's problems worsened significantly from 2017 as a result of US sanctions, which added to extant operational difficulties by hindering imports of diluents required for the blending of Venezuela's predominantly heavy and extra-heavy oil. They also sharply reduced the pool of potential buyers, making Venezuela reliant on selling crude exports via third-party intermediaries in order to evade sanctions, at a sharp discount.
However, a noticeable improvement in PDVSA's oil output began in late 2021. The most important contributor to increased oil output has been an oil swap agreement between PDVSA and the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC), its Iranian counterpart. PDVSA has used the Iranian condensate provided through this deal to obtain a regular supply of diluents with which it can blend its heavy crude. Iranian diluents have provided a vital lifeline for the Orinoco Oil Belt (OOB, Venezuela's largest oil-producing region). In February 2022 the two countries also signed a 20-year memorandum of understanding (MoU), under which Iran agreed to help Venezuela to overhaul and renovate its refining system and gas-processing plants, in addition to providing it with technology transfers and training services.
Another factor that has helped to buoy oil output has been the establishment of new partnerships with local oil service firms. In recent months PDVSA has focused on salvaging oil fields that are in a relatively decent condition with the help of small, independent contractors. Even though PDVSA has to offer a hefty discount on its crude to attract purchasers (who face the risk of secondary US sanctions), a rally in international oil prices has nonetheless helped to improve the company's cash flow. As a result, PDVSA has reportedly been able to pay drilling firms directly in cash. Outsourcing drilling work has also allowed PDVSA to increase production without expanding its own payroll.
Against this backdrop, PDVSA managed to lift oil output to 750,000 b/d in April. The Maduro regime aims to lift oil output to 2m b/d by end-2022, but as PDVSA is already running up against capacity constraints, that target is simply not realistic. Expanding production capacity would require significant capital investment, which is extremely unlikely given PDVSA's strained finances and its lack of access to capital markets. In theory, PDVSA's cash flows could benefit from the current oil boom (even considering the discount that the company must offer buyers to compensate for sanctions risk). However, PDVSA has been unable to fully capitalise on the tighter oil market, as the recent uptick in its production has not been matched by higher export volumes. This is largely because PDVSA has struggled to address quality issues linked to Iranian condensate (such as excess water and sulphur), which have often resulted in returned shipments. The company has also run into frequent storage and transport bottlenecks. Given the extremely poor state of Venezuela's oil infrastructure, these problems will not be easily remedied. As a result, we expect Venezuelan oil production to rise only moderately, to 830,000 b/d by end-2022 and 940,000 b/d by end-2026.
Lifting production more significantly would require huge private investment, prospects for which will remain poor for as long as US sanctions remain in place. In our view, the US administration, led by Joe Biden, is unlikely to provide significant sanctions relief in the absence of major political compromises and commitments to democratic reforms on the part of the Maduro regime, which remain highly unlikely. Mr Maduro has indicated that he will look to revive the Venezuelan oil industry by promoting private investment in the sector. The president has also suggested that he will seek to evade sanctions by taking advantage of a recently passed anti-blockade law, which gives the executive branch the unchecked authority to sign confidential new deals with private firms and countries. The Maduro regime has tabled a reform to the hydrocarbons law that would, among other things, abolish PDVSA's 60% equity requirement in joint ventures, flexibilise labour rules, reduce oil royalties and provide exemptions for municipal taxes. However, we remain sceptical about prospects for large-scale investments given the discretionary legal framework, the abysmal state of local infrastructure and the high costs of doing business.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Consumer prices 1,588.5 124.2 51.8 44.5 40.7 39.3
Average nominal wages 1,693.7 166.4 59.6 49.2 44.5 43.1
Average real wages 6.2 18.8 5.2 3.3 2.7 2.8
Unit labour costs (US$-based) 72.9 82.7 27.1 3.2 -9.8 -18.1
Labour costs per hour (US$) 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.5
A four-year bout of hyperinflation ended in December 2021. Assuming that the government carries on paring back deficit monetisation, we believe that inflation will continue to subside over the medium term. Nevertheless, there are factors that will complicate the disinflationary process. Despite some improvement, the country's limited capacity both to produce and to import goods means that supply shortages will persist in several areas. The country's de facto bi-monetary system will also present challenges to the price-setting process. The BCV has recently been acting aggressively to prop up the local currency, but this strategy is producing significant real bolívar overvaluation. This means that, for the large swathe of the population that transacts in US dollars but faces prices in bolívares, the cost of living is actually rising. We are not confident that the authorities will be able to address these inherent contradictions in the Venezuelan economy; on this basis, we expect inflation to remain in double digits, even at the end of our forecast period.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (av) 3.23 c 4.6 5.8 8.3 13.3 23.2
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (end‑period) 4.61 c 4.97 6.64 9.96 16.77 30.08
Exchange rate BsD:¥100 (av) 2.95 c 3.83 4.63 6.62 11.10 19.67
Purchasing power parity BsD:US$1 (av) 1.69 3.27 4.88 6.65 9.09 12.39
The BCV's exchange-rate policy is driven by a desire to promote bolívar demand, with a view to regaining monetary autonomy over the medium to long term. To that end, the BCV has been intervening aggressively in currency markets to artificially strengthen the purchasing power of the bolívar. Private-sector estimates indicate that currency interventions have already cost the BCV more than US$1.3bn (1.1% of GDP) in the year to date. However, we do not expect recent real bolívar appreciation to halt the spread of dollarisation, reflecting extremely weak confidence in the fundamentals of the local currency.
In our view, the BCV lacks the firepower to sustain its current foreign-exchange strategy, and we therefore expect real depreciation pressures to re-emerge over the medium term. Although there is considerable uncertainty around the future of the bolívar, we have not pencilled into our forecasts another maxi-devaluation of the kind seen in 2018.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Current-account balance 0.4 3.7 4.1 3.8 3.3 2.6
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.6 3.1 2.6 2.3 2.3 2.2
Goods: exports fob 10.1 23.0 20.2 18.7 17.5 16.2
Goods: imports fob -9.8 -19.1 -15.2 -14.8 -14.3 -14.0
Trade balance 0.3 3.9 5.0 4.0 3.2 2.1
Services: credit 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6
Services: debit -3.5 -4.5 -4.8 -5.1 -5.3 -5.5
Services balance -3.2 -4.0 -4.3 -4.5 -4.7 -4.8
Primary income: credit 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6
Primary income: debit -2.4 -3.0 -4.0 -3.4 -3.3 -3.2
Primary income balance -2.2 -2.6 -3.4 -2.9 -2.8 -2.6
Secondary income: credit 5.5 6.4 7.0 7.4 7.7 8.0
Secondary income: debit 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1
Secondary income balance 5.5 6.4 6.9 7.2 7.6 7.9
A poor policy mix will hamper Venezuela's ability to capitalise on the current oil price boom. The BCV reported that reserves stood at US$10.6bn as at end-April, but this includes an allocation of IMF special drawing rights (SDRs) that the authorities cannot access. In reality, reserves are closer to US$5.5bn-their lowest level in three decades. Despite a supportive current-account position (propped up by higher oil export receipts and remittances from abroad), the BCV's errant currency strategy will cause continued reserves depletion in the near term. Assuming that the BCV gradually pares back its aggressive currency intervention, we expect reserves (excluding SDRs) to stabilise at around US$5bn in the second half of our 2022-26 forecast period. Nevertheless, given the lack of a credible and consistent policy framework, we cannot discount the risk of tighter controls or an outright currency crisis in the future.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Venezuela Stocks and flows According to the IMF (whose figures differ somewhat from local sources), the stock of foreign direct investment (FDI) in Venezuela stood at US$30.2bn in 2016, the last year for which actual data have been provided. This is about a third less than a peak of US$48.9bn in 2007, primarily owing to significant disinvestment. Based on data released by the UN Conference on Trade and Development since then, EIU estimates that the FDI stock has increased marginally, to US$33.9bn in 2021. Although the FDI stock represented a whopping 48% of GDP in 2021, this largely reflects a collapse in GDP in 2014-20, followed by an extremely tepid rebound in 2021. Overall, FDI inflows have been extremely volatile in the past 20 years, affected by both political and macroeconomic factors. During the oil opening of 1996-98, inward FDI peaked at an annual average of US$4.5bn per year. By historical standards, inward FDI held up well in the first three years of the presidency of Hugo Chávez (1999-2013), averaging US$3.8bn per year in 1999-2001. As political conflict intensified, FDI inflows began to decline in 2002-08 (averaging US$1.9bn per year), and in 2009-a year of great volatility in the world economy and adverse domestic developments in Venezuela-the country registered disinvestment of US$1.1bn (some negative inflows were also the result of compensation for nationalisations). Inward FDI recovered afterwards, averaging an estimated US$4.3bn per year in 2011-13, owing to greater investment from China in energy and housing. Inward FDI weakened considerably after Nicolás Maduro, the current president, took power, averaging US$1.2bn in 2014-21, reflecting a much weaker international oil price environment, as well as foreign investors' growing disillusionment with the government's inability to comply with investment agreements and manage the economy. Outbound FDI in Venezuela is considerable but is dominated by investments abroad by PDVSA, the state oil company. According to the Fund, the stock of outward FDI stood at US$32.7bn in 2016; we estimate that it to rose to US$37bn in 2021.
Origin and distribution The energy sector, and oil in particular, remains the main magnet for FDI. US and European oil companies have major investments in the country, even after forced changes to the ownership structure of most contracts. After oil, banking and communications have been the main recipients of FDI. Spanish banks have the largest foreign presence in the financial sector, although the Venezuelan state has bought back some operations. Other notable FDI inflows come from Chile (in forestry activities) and Canada (in the mining industry). Owing to wide-ranging US sanctions and restricted access to external finance, short-term efforts will focus on courting investment from China, Russia and Iran, although these efforts are likely to yield limited success.
Determinants Following a period of booming FDI inflows in the 1990s, driven by oil and telecommunications openings, an uncertain political and policy environment-including threats of nationalisation-and a volatile macroeconomic climate have kept FDI well below potential, particularly in the non-extractive sectors. In the extractive sector, FDI inflows have been affected by the government's restrictive hydrocarbons investment regime, which mandates that PDVSA must hold a minimum 60% stake in the oil and gas sector, and levies high taxes and royalties on private partners. The vast reserves of extra-heavy oil in the Orinoco Belt require substantial technical know-how and huge investment to be put to production, an environment where major oil companies would thrive. Many major companies are already present via joint ventures or were present before nationalisation drives. Venezuela's oil sector would continue to be a major draw for FDI under more sustainable economic and regulatory policies.
Impact Foreign investment in oil brought accelerated growth in output, from 2.4m barrels/day in 1994 to a peak of 3.4m b/d in 1999. Foreign investment in the extractive sector has fallen since then, contributing to a decline in oil output, reinforced by PDVSA's inability to drive production. Foreign involvement has had a less dramatic impact in other sectors, such as domestic manufacturing and services, resulting in high levels of import dependence. As FDI has flowed mostly into capital-intensive industries, its impact on employment and skills levels has been limited.
Potential Given the scale of economic mismanagement and poor maintenance of existing infrastructure and productive capacity, there is large potential for investment opportunities in Venezuela. Potentially attractive opportunities for FDI exist in an array of sectors, such as oil and gas, petrochemicals, coal, aluminium, gold, forestry, power, tourism, and telecoms. There is additional potential in some manufacturing and agricultural niches (for example leather goods, cocoa and rum). However, FDI inflows will be severely curtailed by concerns about the government's policy stance, difficulties in accessing foreign exchange, the weak macroeconomic environment and the fragility of the legal framework. A recovery in investment is unlikely under Mr Maduro, as exchange-rate distortions and controls on local prices will remain unaddressed. A more noticeable upturn in FDI inflows will have to wait until after a political transition takes place, and only if the new government were to engage in structural economic reforms.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2016 2021 2026
Population (m)
Total 30.8 29.0 27.9
 Male 15.3 14.2 13.8
 Female 15.5 14.7 14.1
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 27.7 25.4 24.4
 15-64 65.6 66.1 65.9
 65+ 6.7 8.4 9.8
Young-age dependency ratio 0.42 0.38 0.37
Old-age dependency ratio 0.10 0.13 0.15
Working-age population (m) 20.2 19.2 18.4
Urbanisation (% of total) 88.2 88.3 88.5
Labour force (m) 14.3 10.9 11.1
       
Period averages   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth (%)   -1.2 -0.7
Working-age population growth (%)   -1.1 -0.8
Labour force growth (%)   -5.3 0.5
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   18.4 17.8
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   6.7 7.0
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   31.8 29.4
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   68.6 68.6
 Female   76.0 76.1
 Average   72.0 71.6
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; EIU estimates and forecasts; national statistics.
Mass emigration will continue while the current government is in power Population growth will remain weak because of a falling birth rate and large-scale emigration. Annual population growth has been slowing steadily, from 2.6% in the 1980s to 2.1% in the 1990s and 1.6% in 2000-10. EIU estimates that Venezuela's population declined by an annual average of 1.2% in the 2017-21 historical period, as a result of the country's deepest recorded socioeconomic crisis. The UN High Commission for Refugees estimates that 6.1m Venezuelans have left the country since 2014, with about 1.8m residing in neighbouring Colombia. Although the Venezuelan economy finally stopped contracting in 2021 and is now showing signs of a modest rebound, it will remain dwarfed by historical comparison. Given the dearth of economic opportunities locally, we expect outward migration to persist throughout our 2022-26 forecast period. On this basis, we expect the total population to fall to 27.9m by 2026 (from an estimated peak of 31.6m in 2018), with about a quarter of the population aged 14 and under and two-thirds between 15 and 64 years of age. Population density is low, at 32 people/sq km, according to World Bank estimates from 2020. Distribution between urban and rural areas is highly uneven, with almost 90% of the total population living in urban centres. Underdeveloped rural infrastructure and limited job opportunities in the countryside will result in a continuing trend of urbanisation in 2022-26.
Official statistics belie the destruction of the labour market Analysis of the labour market is complicated by a lack of credibility in official statistics. Based on official numbers, the labour force participation rate declined from 75% in 2004 to 70% in 2013 (owing to increased uptake of education, linked to the government's social programmes). Since then, the participation rate has reportedly been on an upward trend, reaching 73% in 2018. The labour market data, however, are at odds with official figures for economic activity, which show that real GDP was on a downward spiral from 2014 until 2020. In our view, labour force participation is likely to have declined in recent years, as deteriorating economic conditions are likely to have discouraged potential job-seekers from entering the market. Our own projections assume that the labour force participation rate fell from 70% in 2013 to 65% in 2018 and to 55% in 2021. We believe that the 2014-20 depression-and associated large-scale emigration-will have had a pronounced and lasting impact on the size of the workforce. We expect the labour force participation rate to pick up only marginally over the forecast period, reaching 58% by 2026.
According to the national statistics institute (INE), the unemployment rate fell from 15% in 2010 to 7% in 2018. Although the INE has not produced unemploy-ment statistics since 2018, a more recent publication by the Ministry of Planning indicates that the official unemployment rate stood at 8.8% in the first half of 2020. Even accounting for extremely inflexible labour laws, these data seem extremely detached from the country's economic realities. Our own projections assume that the unemployment rate stood at almost 50% in full-year 2020. We estimate that the unemployment rate dropped only slightly in 2021, to 45% that year. As macroeconomic conditions stabilise, we expect the unemployment rate to fall more substantially over the forecast period, to 26% by 2026 (still extremely high by regional and global comparison). Moreover, a poor business environment, economic malaise and extremely restrictive labour regulation will hamper job quality and force more people to depend on the informal sector, which is already estimated to account for more than half of employment.
The old-age dependency ratio will remain low by developed-country standards but, in the context of volatile public finances, population ageing will place growing pressure on the heavily burdened social security system. Public hospitals will continue to suffer from crumbling infrastructure and a lack of supplies (including medicines) and equipment. Equipment is mainly imported or assembled from imported parts, and supplies been constrained by a lack of US dollars. Programmes to build and rebuild hospitals have failed owing to mismanagement of funds and shortages of building materials. Even a parallel welfare system, the Sistema Nacional de Misiones, is struggling to function as a result of government spending cuts. We expect the provision and quality of public healthcare and education services to remain poor for the foreseeable future. Weak public provision will reflect other long-standing problems, including a pronounced deficit of technical and basic skills, and the continued emigration of professionals (particularly doctors and nurses).
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Population (m) 29.0 28.8 28.5 28.3 28.1 27.9
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 70.0 122.0 160.0 162.5 145.0 118.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 2,416 4,242 5,606 5,736 5,157 4,229
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 134.0 173.0 189.6 202.0 211.4 220.6
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 4,625 6,015 6,643 7,132 7,517 7,905
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 49.6 96.1 127.2 136.4 125.3 102.7
Median household income (US$) 4,791 6,160 8,262 13,182 14,981 13,363
Household consumption (US$ bn) 44.5 89.1 117.9 125.5 113.6 91.2
Household consumption per head (US$) 1,540 3,100 4,130 4,430 4,040 3,270
Exports of goods & services (% change) 8.2 23.2 7.4 3.9 2.8 2.7
Imports of goods & services (% change) 7.0 31.3 10.9 5.7 4.5 4.0
Venezuela's deep economic crisis caused a sharp decline in living standards, with GDP per head falling by more than four-fifths, from a peak of US$12,921 in 2012 to an estimated US$1,681 in 2020. EIU estimates that GDP per head rose to US$2,416 in 2021, as a result of real currency appreciation and (to a lesser extent) a modest economic rebound. In purchasing power parity (PPP) terms, our estimate of GDP per head is higher, at US$4,625 in 2021. We expect a moderate improvement in both GDP per head at market exchange rates and at PPP in the 2022-26 forecast period, assuming that the current economic recovery continues. A major risk to our outlook stems from uncertainty about the trajectory of the bolívar, which increasingly appears overvalued. Our benign baseline forecast assumes that currency adjustment will be orderly, but we cannot entirely rule out the possibility of a full-blown devaluation. A potential currency crisis would deal a serious blow to domestic purchasing power, even accounting for the cushion provided by partial dollarisation.
Apart from weak domestic purchasing power, several factors will constrain market opportunities, including persistently high rates of poverty and income inequality. Official statistics show dramatic and sustained improvement across myriad social indicators in recent years, but these data have been disputed. According to the government, the multidimensional poverty rate has fallen consistently, from 29.6% in 2004 to 20.4% in 2014 and to 17% in 2019. However, these data contrast starkly with independent measures of multidimensional poverty. According to the Encuesta Nacional de Condiciones de Vida (Encovi, an annual survey conducted by three well-regarded local universities), the poverty rate rose from 39% in 2014 to 65% in 2019 (and stabilised at that level in 2021).
The government does not produce separate statistics on measures of inequality, but Encovi data indicate extremely wide income gaps in the country. Based on Encovi figures, Venezuela's Gini index score-a measure of income inequality that ranges from 0 (perfect equality) to 100 (complete inequality)-rose from 40.7 in 2014 to a peak of 68.7 in 2017, before easing to 56.7 in 2021, probably driven by the exodus of middle- and high-income Venezuelans. Despite this, Venezuela is still one of the most unequal countries both regionally and globally.
Investment potential will only be tapped after a political transition Venezuela is a reasonably sized consumer market and has the potential to become an attractive investment location. However, this will not translate into real gains until a more market-friendly administration takes over (not our baseline forecast). The country has vast reserves of natural resources (including oil, gas, coal and precious metals), an array of spectacular natural tourist attractions and a fairly favourable geographical location (given its proximity to the US). However, poor economic policies have contributed to a volatile GDP profile and deteriorations of public services and human capital over the past two decades. The unattractiveness of the business environment is compounded by inadequate contract and property rights. Moreover, a deterioration in the quality of healthcare and education provision in the past three decades has contributed to an erosion of skills and productivity, exacerbated by an exodus of talented individuals to work abroad.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 74,370 50,024 56,254 78,532 86,391 97,776
Housing & household fuels 18,647 12,262 13,376 18,124 20,406 23,582
Clothing & footwear 9,950 6,114 6,585 8,463 8,751 9,315
Household goods & services 17,801 10,931 11,797 15,778 17,201 19,281
Health 10,230 6,221 6,058 7,397 7,551 7,919
Transport & communications 39,189 22,854 24,205 33,028 38,285 45,693
Leisure & education 1,545 951 1,042 1,434 1,621 1,882
Hotels & restaurants 27,875 16,619 18,230 25,424 28,833 33,665
Other 8,548 4,657 4,953 6,991 7,996 9,421
Total 208,155 130,633 142,499 195,171 217,036 248,535
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 35.7 38.3 39.5 40.2 39.8 39.3
Housing & household fuels 9.0 9.4 9.4 9.3 9.4 9.5
Clothing & footwear 4.8 4.7 4.6 4.3 4.0 3.7
Household goods & services 8.6 8.4 8.3 8.1 7.9 7.8
Health 4.9 4.8 4.3 3.8 3.5 3.2
Transport & communications 18.8 17.5 17.0 16.9 17.6 18.4
Leisure & education 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8
Hotels & restaurants 13.4 12.7 12.8 13.0 13.3 13.5
Other 4.1 3.6 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8
Retail sales volumes will be subdued in 2022-26 As in the rest of Latin America, spending on food, beverages and tobacco accounts for the largest share of total consumer expenditure; this will remain the case throughout the forecast period. Most consumer goods industries will remain underdeveloped owing to government controls and the country's severely damaged productive capacity. Moreover, limited availability of foreign exchange has resulted in a scarcity of consumer goods that are not produced domestically. The weak outlook for economic recovery will subdue retail sales volumes throughout the 2022-26 forecast period.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2021   2026  
  Venezuela Latin America (av) Venezuela Latin America (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 5.5 8.3 5.1 8.3
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 139 683 201 896
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 36.0 13.9 25.9 12.5
Physicians (per 1,000 population) – 2.6 – 2.8
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 34.8 40.5 31.8 36.9
Meat consumption (kg per person) 29.7 78.1 38.2 82.6
Milk consumption (litres per person) 75.9 134.0 86.7 140.0
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 2.3 3.4 2.7 3.6
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 166 222 205 247
Telephone main lines 171 157 165 148
Mobile phone subscribers 544 1,050 531 1,140
Television sets 268 707 301 806
Personal computers 455 491 499 648
Households
No. of households (m) 6.6 131.8 6.4 136.0
No. of people per household (av) 4.4 3.7 4.4 3.7
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 6,160 12,569 10,702 12,569
Average monthly wage (US$) 1 24,589 0 24,589
Gini index 44.8 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); EIU estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population -0.42 1.57 0.95
Working-age population -0.37 1.57 0.96
Working-age minus total population 0.05 0.00 0.02
Labour force -1.42 2.50 1.27
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 5.2 1.9 2.9
Growth of real GDP 4.7 3.5 3.9
Labour productivity growth 2.9 1.0 1.5
Growth of capital stock -0.9 5.6 3.5
Total factor productivity growth 4.2 -0.2 1.1
EIU expects Venezuela's real GDP per head to grow by an annual average of 5.2% in 2022-30 (following a steep contraction of 13.7% in the preceding decade). Although an ongoing oil boom will support economic recovery in the near term, we believe that the expansion is something of a dead cat bounce. The current regime, led by Nicolás Maduro, will not undertake the necessary economic, legal and institutional reforms needed to put Venezuela on the path to robust, sustainable growth. Our long-term forecasts assume that successor governments will gradually put forward structural reforms to the oil sector and the business environment. Nevertheless, the country's weak institutions, its dependence on the extractive industry and a weak productive base will remain significant barriers to growth. As a result, we expect real GDP per head to grow by a modest 1.9% per year in 2031-50. By 2050 (the end of our long-term forecast period), we project that per-head GDP at purchasing power parity (PPP) will be just US$19,828. This will leave it only marginally higher than before the 2014-20 depression (US$18,547 in 2013) and is extremely low for a country with Venezuela's endowment of national resources.
The macroeconomic collapse will impair the long-term productivity capacity Initial conditions: After expanding by an annual average of 10% in 2004-08, real GDP fell sharply in 2009-10. Although the economy recovered in 2011-12 on the back of aggressive public spending, growth decelerated sharply again in 2013. This slowdown gave way to a deep recession amid a collapse in oil prices, serious policy mismanagement and inefficiencies stemming from large-scale corruption. We estimate that real GDP contracted by a whopping 78% in 2014-20-the largest recorded economic collapse for any country outside of war. A pivot towards more orthodox macroeconomic policies and the elimination of distortionary controls helped to stabilise the economy in 2021. Nevertheless, the country's crisis will have long-lasting effects, many of which will prove extremely hard to reverse. Corruption is deeply ingrained in the political culture, and rooting it out will be difficult. The emigration of most skilled labour, along with underinvestment in human capital, will undermine the quality of the labour force for years to come. The infrastructure deficit will also continue to expand, as fiscal constraints will impede public investment.
Demographic trends: As in most other emerging markets, growth in the working-age population will slow in the long term, although the labour force will grow more quickly as participation rates rise. Venezuela will continue to enjoy supportive population dynamics, as the dependency ratio of old to young will remain low by OECD standards, even in 2050. Despite a steady rise in life expectancy, the share of the population aged 65 years and over will be only about 11% in 2050, whereas the share of the population at working age will remain high, at 69%. A particular risk to productivity is "brain drain", as many experienced professionals have left the country to work abroad in recent years, with no guarantee of returning.
Oil will remain crucial to Venezuela's economic prospects External conditions: We estimate that oil accounts for close to 90% of export revenue at present and expect it to continue to dominate the Venezuelan economy. Although there will be a limited drive to diversify the productive base in the long term, Venezuela will remain highly dependent on exports of oil and other commodities. Under Hugo Chávez (1999-2013) and now under Mr Maduro, Venezuela and its allies have taken a confrontational stance against US policy and US-led efforts at economic integration. In the medium term, we expect Venezuela to continue to rely heavily on oil and extractive industries, and to strengthen economic links with Asian markets and existing political allies (such as Russia, Turkey and Iran). In the longer term, however, we assume that successive governments will implement a number of structural economic and political reforms, which will allow Venezuela to diversify away from oil to some degree, breathing life back into trade with the US.
Institutions and policy trends: We assume that the Maduro government will now take a more prudent approach to policy than it did before the 2014-20 depression. This implies that the government will continue its efforts to rein in fiscal imbalances and scale back distortionary controls. However, there is a high degree of uncertainty attached to our outlook, given that the government regards policy efficacy as subordinate to the need to maintain political control. Moreover, even assuming that the government does not reverse course on policy, prospects for improvements in other areas of the business environment are weak, as structural microeconomic reforms will not be forthcoming. Much-needed reforms to the social security system, labour legislation and trade policy will all be left to future administrations. In 2031-50 we assume that successive governments will bring in policy improvements, but gains will be slow to materialise given the country's institutional weakness.
Long-term performance: Even once the most distortionary elements of current economic policy have been abandoned, Venezuela's GDP growth potential will be constrained by the erosion of the country's skills base and the large-scale capital destruction that has taken place over the last decade. However, there is still scope for recovery: we expect real GDP growth to average 3.3% in 2031-40, before picking up to 3.9% in 2041-50. Higher GDP growth rates would be possible in the long term under new, more market-friendly administrations that we would expect to pursue reforms to the country's long-standing economic and political policies. Our forecasts assume that capital and labour will be the main contributors to growth (as both recover from a low base of comparison). However, productivity growth will disappoint, as adoption of new technologies remains challenging. The overall economy will remain vulnerable to continuing boom-bust cycles, which will undermine macroeconomic stability and growth. This will hamper prospects for catch-up with more developed economies.
Income and market size
  2021 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 29.0 27.9 38.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 70.0 135.2 301.2
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 2,420 4,850 7,910
Private consumption (US$ bn) 44.5 – –
Private consumption per head (US$) 1,540 – –
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 0.1 0.3 0.8
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 4,630 9,190 19,830
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 29.4 – –
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 18.2 – –
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 6.7 9.4 10.7
Share of world population (%) 0.4 0.3 0.4
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.1 0.1 0.1
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.0 0.0 0.0
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 0.1 0.0 0.2
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Venezuela is vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, owing both to its geographical limitations and the government's inadequate focus on preparedness. Venezuela is extremely vulnerable to climate change because its population is heavily concentrated along coastal lines on unstable terrains (about 75% of the country's population is estimated to live in the 20% of the territory facing the Caribbean Sea). Given low infrastructure maintenance and little disaster preparedness, population centres there are exposed to torrential rains, mudslides and flash floods. According to a recent study by a local and internationally recognised expert, Juan Carlos Sanchez, even within established rainfall patterns, variance has resulted in a rising number of extreme events per year in the past decade. Longer-term trends in rainfall will also affect the country. A study by the Universidad Simón Bolívar, a well-regarded local university, concluded that rainfall in the northwest of the country could fall by 25% by 2060. This would not only cause internal migration but would also drive the country into further food insecurity (Venezuela is already heavily reliant on imports of foodstuffs). In addition, changing rain patterns may disrupt hydroelectricity generation, a major problem given that this represents more than 50% of the country's electricity.
The government has done little to address these challenges. Its public works programmes concentrate on traditional infra-structure projects, and minimal attention is given to disaster preparedness. Official data on carbon emissions and pollution in the country are scarce, but environmental policies are generally deemed poor by specialist observers. PDVSA, the state-owned oil firm, has been routinely accused of poor environmental protection in both its oil and gas operations. EIU has developed a model to calculate the impact of climate change on long-term growth; we find that the Venezuelan economy will be almost 5% smaller in 2050 than it would have been without this hit to growth.
Migration and urbanisation Venezuela experienced rapid urbanisation through the majority of the second half of the 20th century, when the country's oil wealth was developed. According to data from the World Bank, the percentage of the population living in urban centres grew from 60% in 1960 to almost 90% by the late 1990s-high by global standards but in line with most large Latin American countries. Oil exports, especially at the start of this process, funded large-scale real-estate developments and infrastructure works in budding urban centres, attracting prospective workers from the countryside. In addition to a growing middle class fed by spillover from the country's oil wealth, the exodus from rural areas to cities created sprawling shanty-towns across major metropolises, which public-housing programmes have been unable to eradicate. Income inequality in urban centres is especially acute, feeding crime and political tension. This is perhaps best exemplified in Caracas, the capital, where income and wealth disparities have correlated with whether voters back the ruling Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV) or support opposition parties.
Emigration, previously a limited phenomenon, has become a major issue. According to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, a total of 6.1m Venezuelans (representing more than one-fifth of the current population) have left the country since 2014, mostly in the past five years. Migration was initially driven by political factors, but the exodus is also being driven by criminal violence (Venezuela has one of the world's highest murder rates) and woeful economic conditions. Anecdotal evidence suggests that those leaving have been primarily young, well-trained professionals, further harming the country's economic prospects. Under our baseline assumption that there will not be a political transition in the short term, outward migration will continue (albeit at a slower pace than in 2018-20). Skilled workers in particular will seek to move abroad, further dampening Venezuela's long-term growth potential.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions
World GDP growth (%) 3.2 3.0 2.3 -3.7 5.7 3.3 3.1 2.8 2.6 2.6
US GDP growth (%) 2.3 2.9 2.3 -3.4 5.7 3.0 1.9 1.7 1.9 1.7
Latin America growth (%) 0.9 0.8 -0.7 -7.0 6.4 2.4 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.3
World trade growth (%) 5.6 3.8 0.3 -4.9 10.5 4.9 4.7 4.0 3.6 3.6
US CPI (%) 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.7 7.2 2.8 2.1 2.1 2.1
EU27 CPI (%) 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.8 6.3 2.5 2.0 1.9 1.9
Industrial raw materials export price (%) 20.2 2.2 -8.6 -3.2 40.4 17.9 -0.6 -3.8 -4.1 -2.1
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 70.4 105.7 89.3 79.0 74.0 68.5
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (%) 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 1.4 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.1
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.13 1.18 1.22 1.24
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 133.0 140.8 146.8 145.1 146.0
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Expenditure on GDP (BsD bn at current market prices)
GDP 0.00 0.01 0.79 16.04 226.4 565 925 1,344 1,922 2,733
Private consumption 0.00 0.01 0.61 11.09 144.1 413 682 1,038 1,506 2,113
Government consumption 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.95 11.6 37 60 90 130 185
Gross fixed investment 0.00 0.00 0.10 1.93 34.9 97 170 257 355 474
Exports of goods & services 0.00 0.00 0.42 5 95 242 286 384 600 1,004
Imports of goods & services 0.00 0.01 0.43 3 59 223 273 425 669 1,043
Stockbuilding 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Domestic demand 0.00 0.01 0.79 14 190 547 912 1,385 1,991 2,772
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 139.3 91.9 58.0 50.0 70.0 122.0 160.0 162.5 145.0 118.0
Private consumption 139.9 71.9 45.0 34.6 44.5 89.1 117.9 125.5 113.6 91.2
Government consumption 12.5 12.0 6.1 2.9 3.6 8.0 10.4 10.9 9.8 8.0
Gross fixed investment 22.9 14.1 7.6 6.0 10.8 21.0 29.4 31.1 26.8 20.5
Exports of goods & services 42.8 46.4 31.4 17.0 29.4 52.2 49.5 46.4 45.3 43.3
Imports of goods & services 50.7 52.4 32.1 10.6 18.2 48.2 47.2 51.4 50.4 45.0
Stockbuilding -28.1 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 147.2 97.9 58.7 43.5 58.9 118.1 157.7 167.4 150.2 119.7
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 100.5 78.3 77.6 69.2 63.6 73.0 73.7 77.2 78.3 77.3
Government consumption 9.0 13.1 10.6 5.9 5.1 6.5 6.5 6.7 6.8 6.8
Gross fixed investment 16.5 15.4 13.2 12.0 15.4 17.2 18.4 19.1 18.5 17.4
Stockbuilding -20.2 -0.1 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Exports of goods & services 30.7 50.5 54.1 34.0 42.0 42.8 30.9 28.6 31.2 36.7
Imports of goods & services 36.4 57.1 55.3 21.1 26.1 39.5 29.5 31.6 34.8 38.2
Memorandum items
Oil production ('000 b/d) 1,925 1,432 a 827 a 505 565 766 840 880 910 940
National savings ratio (%) -9.9 b 13.6 11.0 9.1 11.4 4.1 -8.9 -27.2 -36.2 -37.0
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Real expenditure on GDP (c at 1997 market prices)
GDP 39.24 b 31.54 b 19.56 13.30 14.36 17.56 18.67 19.44 19.92 20.36
Private consumption 27.04 b 21.62 b 13.08 9.56 10.18 12.72 13.51 14.06 14.53 14.99
Government consumption 8.98 b 8.16 b 6.06 4.79 5.03 6.04 6.46 6.72 6.92 7.06
Gross fixed investment 3.94 b 2.46 b 1.23 0.92 1.11 1.55 1.86 2.06 2.10 2.15
Exports of goods & services 6.51 b 5.81 b 4.20 3.14 3.39 4.18 4.49 4.67 4.79 4.92
Imports of goods & services 5.66 b 5.68 b 4.60 4.90 5.24 6.88 7.62 8.06 8.42 8.76
Stockbuilding -1.56 b -0.83 b -0.41 -0.21 -0.10 -0.05 -0.03 -0.01 -0.01 0.00
Domestic demand 38.39 b 31.41 b 19.96 15.06 16.21 20.26 21.80 22.83 23.55 24.19
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP -15.7 -19.6 -38.0 -32.0 8.0 22.2 6.3 4.2 2.5 2.2
Private consumption -16.2 -20.1 -39.5 -26.9 6.5 25.0 6.2 4.1 3.3 3.2
Government consumption -7.2 -9.1 -25.7 -21.0 5.0 20.0 7.0 4.0 3.0 2.0
Fixed investment -45.3 -37.5 -50.0 -25.0 20.0 40.0 20.0 11.0 2.0 2.0
Exports of goods & services 0.0 -10.8 -27.7 -25.3 8.2 23.2 7.4 3.9 2.8 2.7
Imports of goods & services -34.7 0.3 -19.0 6.5 7.0 31.3 10.9 5.7 4.5 4.0
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -2.4 1.9 1.3 1.1 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand -21.1 -18.2 -36.5 -24.5 7.6 25.0 7.6 4.7 3.1 2.8
Real contribution to growth (%)
Private consumption -11.2 -13.8 -27.1 -18.0 4.7 17.7 4.5 3.0 2.4 2.3
Government consumption -1.5 -2.1 -6.6 -6.5 1.8 7.0 2.4 1.4 1.0 0.7
Gross fixed investment -7.0 -3.8 -3.9 -1.6 1.4 3.1 1.8 1.1 0.2 0.2
External balance 6.4 -1.8 -1.7 -7.0 -0.7 -5.9 -2.5 -1.4 -1.2 -1.0
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 b 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Origin of GDP (c at 1997 prices)
GDP at factor cost 39.24 31.54 19.56 13.30 14.36 17.56 18.67 19.44 19.92 20.36
Agriculture 1.15 0.97 0.63 0.44 0.48 0.53 0.55 0.57 0.58 0.60
Industry 11.14 7.72 4.46 2.72 3.05 4.13 4.53 4.75 4.91 5.07
Services 26.94 22.85 14.47 10.14 10.84 12.90 13.58 14.13 14.43 14.69
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture -16.5 -16.3 -35.0 -30.0 8.5 10.0 5.0 3.0 3.0 3.0
Industry -23.2 -30.7 -42.2 -39.0 11.9 35.7 9.6 4.8 3.4 3.3
Services -12.1 -15.2 -36.7 -29.9 6.9 19.0 5.3 4.0 2.1 1.8
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 2.9 3.1 3.2 a 3.3 a 3.3 3.0 3.0 2.9 2.9 3.0
Industry 28.4 24.5 22.8 a 20.5 a 21.2 23.5 24.3 24.4 24.6 24.9
Services 68.7 72.4 74.0 a 76.2 a 75.5 73.5 72.8 72.7 72.4 72.1
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity
Labour productivity growth (%) -20.2 -22.9 3.4 4.6 2.8 1.9 0.5 1.1 0.0 0.0
Total factor productivity growth (%) -16.1 -19.1 -8.7 -6.0 8.0 12.5 5.8 5.4 4.1 4.0
Growth of capital stock (%) -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0
Growth of potential GDP (%) -15.0 -19.0 -28.4 -9.4 2.8 10.8 3.6 3.2 1.8 1.7
Growth of GDP (%) -15.7 c -19.6 c -38.0 -32.0 8.0 22.2 6.3 4.2 2.5 2.2
Growth of GDP per head (%) -16.8 -20.6 -34.1 -32.0 10.9 23.2 7.1 4.9 3.2 3.0
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 31.2 b 31.6 29.7 29.7 29.0 28.8 28.5 28.3 28.1 27.9
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 139.3 91.9 58.0 50.0 70.0 122.0 160.0 162.5 145.0 118.0
GDP (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 9 87 54.7 47.7 68.5 119.6 156.9 159.3 142.2 115.7
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 4,461 b 2,906 1,950 1,681 2,416 4,242 5,606 5,736 5,157 4,229
GDP per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 275 2,748 1,838 1,602 2,363 4,159 5,496 5,624 5,056 4,146
Private consumption (US$ bn) 139.9 71.9 45.0 34.6 44.5 89.1 117.9 125.5 113.6 91.2
Private consumption (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 9 68 42.4 33.0 43.6 87.4 115.6 123.0 111.3 89.4
Private consumption per head (US$) 4,480 b 2,270 1,510 1,160 1,540 3,100 4,130 4,430 4,040 3,270
Private consumption per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 276 2,151 1,426 1,108 1,504 3,038 4,051 4,343 3,960 3,205
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 333.2 274.3 173.1 119.2 134.0 173.0 189.6 202.0 211.4 220.6
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 10,670 b 8,670 5,820 4,010 4,630 6,010 6,640 7,130 7,520 7,900
Personal disposable income (BsD bn) 0.00 b 0.01 0.66 12.69 160 445 736 1,129 1,661 2,380
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 155.4 b 81.4 48.5 39.6 49.6 96.1 127.2 136.4 125.3 102.7
Growth of real disposable income (%) -16.2 b -18.6 -42.4 -22.4 3.6 21.1 6.2 5.0 4.8 5.3
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.42 b 0.42 0.39 0.39 0.37 0.37 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.35
Share of world GDP (%; market exchange rates) 0.17 0.11 0.07 0.06 0.07 0.12 0.15 0.15 0.12 0.10
Share of world GDP (%; PPP) 0.28 0.21 0.13 0.09 0.09 0.11 0.11 0.12 0.11 0.12
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.20 0.18 a 0.09 0.03 0.05 0.10 0.08 0.07 0.07 0.06
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
NFPS expenditure 43.2 48.5 26.8 19.6 21.0 22.5 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0
Interest 1.0 1.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Non-interest expenditure 42.2 47.5 26.6 19.6 21.0 22.5 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0
NFPS revenue 20.2 17.5 16.8 14.6 16.5 18.7 18.4 18.4 18.7 18.7
NFPS balance -23.0 -31.0 -10.0 -5.0 -4.5 -3.8 -3.6 -3.6 -3.3 -3.3
Primary balance -22.0 -30.0 -9.8 -5.0 -4.5 -3.8 -3.6 -3.6 -3.3 -3.3
Government debt 36.0 180.8 232.8 304.1 307.0 285.0 255.0 252.0 265.0 275.0
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 a 2021 a 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (av) 0.0000 b 0.0001 0.0135 0.3207 3.23 3.23 a 4.6 5.8 8.3 13.3
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (end-period) 0.0000 b 0.0006 0.0445 1.0673 4.61 4.61 c 4.97 6.64 9.96 16.8
Parallel exchange rate BsD:US$ (av) 0.0000 b 0.0000 0.0000 0.0003 0.003 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02
Exchange rate BsD:€1 (av) 0.0000 0.0001 0.0152 0.3660 3.83 5.10 6.52 9.72 16.11 28.72
Exchange rate BsD:€1 (end-period) 0.0000 0.0007 0.0500 1.3097 5.22 5.22 c 5.55 7.63 11.90 20.6
Purchasing power parity BsD:US$1 (av) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.13 b 1.69 b 3.27 4.88 6.65 9.09 12.39
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 1,170.0 63,281.9 a 4,945.6 a 1,286.8 635.2 186.5 84.9 49.6 44.7 42.2
Domestic credit growth (%) 598.6 b 111,498.3 2,306.5 1,623.7 b 1,381.7 b 245.8 86.0 49.4 44.7 42.2
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 21.1 22.3 a 28.7 a 15.2 9.0 5.0 19.3 23.6 27.8 28.8
Deposit interest rate (%; av) 14.7 14.6 a 30.6 a 52.9 43.7 36.3 33.1 28.6 25.8 23.8
Money market interest rate (%; av) 0.5 5.0 a 110.0 a 182.2 238.6 63.8 50.8 45.0 42.0 40.0
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 15.1 15.7 11.5 11.4 10.9 11.0 11.0 11.1 11.1 11.1
Labour force (% change) 5.5 3.9 -26.5 -1.5 -4.2 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2
Employment (m) 14.0 14.6 8.8 5.7 6.0 7.2 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2
Employment (% change) -10.0 -20.0 -40.0 -35.0 5.0 20.0 5.8 3.0 2.5 2.2
Unemployment (m) 1.1 1.1 2.8 5.7 4.9 3.8 3.5 3.3 3.1 2.9
Unemployment rate (%) 7.2 6.9 24.0 49.8 45.0 34.8 31.3 29.4 27.8 26.4
Wage and price inflation (%)
Consumer prices (av) 438.1 c 65,374.1 c 19,906.0 c 2,355.1 c 1,588.5 c 124.2 51.8 44.5 40.7 39.3
Consumer prices (end-period) 862.6 c 130,060.2 c 9,585.5 c 2,959.8 c 686.4 c 59.7 48.5 42.6 39.3 39.3
Producer prices (av) 459.6 65,374.1 19,906.0 2,355.1 1,588.5 124.2 51.8 44.7 40.7 39.3
GDP deflator (av) 748.1 c 572,634.1 13,590.3 2,903.2 1,207.6 104.1 54.1 39.5 39.5 39.1
Private consumption deflator (av) 899.2 c 448,545.6 13,809.7 2,392.1 1,119.4 129.1 55.7 46.2 40.4 36.0
Government consumption deflator (av) 646.3 c 735,105.2 9,141.1 1,342.5 1,064.7 165.9 51.8 44.5 40.7 39.3
Fixed investment deflator (av) 1,495.4 c 687,625.4 14,447.0 2,392.1 1,405.5 99.1 45.7 36.2 35.4 31.0
Average nominal wages 493.7 13,179.5 5,437.5 1,756.1 1,693.7 166.4 59.6 49.2 44.5 43.1
Average real wages 10.3 -79.7 -72.3 -24.4 6.2 18.8 5.2 3.3 2.7 2.8
Unit labour costs (BsD-based) 1,270.5 81,971.4 10,095.3 3,107.6 1,644.2 161.5 58.7 47.5 44.6 43.1
Unit labour costs (US$-based) 1.9 -88.2 -24.2 35.4 72.9 82.7 27.1 3.2 -9.8 -18.1
Labour costs per hour (BsD m) 0.00000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.00 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Labour costs per hour (US$) 1.6 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.5
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 6.8 c 8.9 c 5.9 -2.8 0.4 3.7 4.1 3.8 3.3 2.6
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.9 c 9.7 10.2 -5.7 0.6 3.1 2.6 2.3 2.3 2.2
Goods: exports fob 34.0 c 33.7 c 17.3 5.4 10.1 23.0 20.2 18.7 17.5 16.2
Goods: imports fob -12.0 c -12.8 c -6.6 -7.4 -9.8 -19.1 -15.2 -14.8 -14.3 -14.0
Trade balance 22.0 c 20.9 c 10.7 -1.9 0.3 3.9 5.0 4.0 3.2 2.1
Services: credit 1.1 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6
Services: debit -6.7 -6.4 -5.4 -3.5 -3.5 -4.5 -4.8 -5.1 -5.3 -5.5
Services balance -5.6 c -5.7 c -5.0 -3.2 -3.2 -4.0 -4.3 -4.5 -4.7 -4.8
Primary income: credit 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6
Primary income: debit -10.9 -9.1 -4.0 -2.4 -2.4 -3.0 -4.0 -3.4 -3.3 -3.2
Primary income balance -10.3 c -8.2 c -3.6 -2.2 -2.2 -2.6 -3.4 -2.9 -2.8 -2.6
Secondary income: credit 0.8 2.2 3.8 4.5 5.5 6.4 7.0 7.4 7.7 8.0
Secondary income: debit -0.2 -0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1
Secondary income balance 0.6 c 1.8 c 3.8 4.5 5.5 6.4 6.9 7.2 7.6 7.9
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 45.8 55.6 52.0 37.8 60.3 87.0 76.8 69.3 65.8 61.3
Export prices (% change) -49.1 21.5 -6.4 -27.3 59.5 44.2 -11.7 -9.8 -5.1 -6.7
Import price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 276.1 284.6 214.9 66.4 107.3 216.0 190.5 196.3 184.5 158.4
Import prices (% change) 8.6 3.1 -24.5 -69.1 61.5 101.4 -11.8 3.0 -6.0 -14.1
Terms of trade (2005=100) 16.6 19.5 24.2 56.9 56.2 40.3 40.3 35.3 35.6 38.7
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 5.8 4.2 -0.1 -6.3 14.7 7.2 7.1 4.9 4.4 4.5
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment -0.1 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.0 1.0
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 0.0 1.0 1.6 1.9 1.4 1.2 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.8
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) -0.3 6.3 12.2 15.9 9.1 7.1 4.1 3.5 3.7 4.6
Outward direct investment -2.2 -0.7 -0.7 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.2
Net foreign direct investment -2.3 0.2 0.3 0.6 0.6 1.1 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7
Stock of inward direct investment 30.1 31.0 31.9 32.9 33.9 35.4 36.6 37.6 38.6 39.6
Stock of inward direct investment per head (US$) 964.4 980.4 1,073.3 1,105.5 1,168.8 1,229.8 1,281.1 1,328.8 1,374.2 1,418.6
Stock of inward direct investment (% of GDP) 21.6 33.7 55.0 65.8 48.4 29.0 22.9 23.2 26.6 33.5
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.00 0.23 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.12 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.07
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.10 0.10 0.09 0.10 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.08
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 176.1 c 182.9 c 185.6 c 189.3 c 193.3 199.3 202.6 196.9 191.3 187.5
Total external debt (% of GDP) 126.5 199.2 320.0 378.6 276.1 163.4 126.6 121.2 132.0 158.9
Total external debt (% of GDP, at parallel exchange rate) 2,050.0 c 210.6 c 339.4 c 397.2 c 282.3 166.7 129.2 123.6 134.6 162.1
Debt/exports ratio (%) 490.8 511.6 977.0 2,752.7 1,632.3 788.2 892.9 920.3 942.5 983.0
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 12.5 13.5 0.2 13.5 3.3 2.1 3.0 3.4 3.5 3.7
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data; EIU is the source for all forecast data unless otherwise stated
Global data Oil prices: dated Brent
US and OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
US and OECD growth: OECD
US 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
US$ effective exchange rate: IMF, IFS; nominal weighted index
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
Domestic data Balance of payments, exchange and interest rates: IMF, IFS
Budget balance: non-financial public sector
Commercial banks' prime lending rate: average nominal interest rate charged on loans to agriculture
Deposit interest rate: average nominal interest rate on 90-day term deposits
Exchange rate: IMF, IFS; market rates expressed as BsD:US$
External debt; World Bank, International Debt Statistics
GDP: at constant 1997 prices, BCV
Inflation: BCV, consumer price index (1997=100) for the Caracas metropolitan area
Labour market statistics: derived from a series given in ILO, Yearbook of Labour Statistics
Oil production and export volumes: Bloomberg
Population: Centro Latinoamericano y Caribeño de Demografía (Celade, Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre)
Social indicators: World Bank, World Development Indicators
Stock of foreign investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report
Abbreviations BCV: Banco Central de Venezuela (the central bank)
IFS: International Financial Statistics
ILO: International Labour Organisation
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows the EIU to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by the EIU for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2017-21) and from EIU assessments for the forecast period (2022-26). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by the EIU for 2017-21. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2022-26 are based on EIU assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; the EIU, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2017-21 ranges are then used to derive 2022-26 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2022-26, not to the likely situation in 2026 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2019 or 2024). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2017-21   2022-26  
  Venezuela Regional average a Venezuela Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 3 4.3 4 4.3
  2. Risk of social unrest 1 2.8 1 2.2
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 1 3.3 1 3.4
  4. Government and opposition 1 3.3 1 2.9
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 1 3.6 3 3.7
  6. International disputes or tensions 1 3.3 1 3.3
  7. Government policy towards business 1 3.1 2 3.2
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 1 2.5 1 2.4
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 1 2.5 1 2.8
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 1 2.5 1 2.6
 11. Efficiency of legal system 1 2.3 1 2.3
 12. Corruption 1 2.2 1 2.3
 13. Impact of crime 1 2.6 1 2.4
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 1 3.8 1 3.8
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 1 2.4 3 3.3
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 1 3.2 1 3.0
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 1 3.3 1 3.7
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 5 4.3 5 4.0
  6. Quality of policymaking 1 3.1 1 2.9
  7. Institutional underpinnings 1 3.3 1 3.3
  8. Asset prices 2 2.8 3 2.9
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 3 3.4 3 3.4
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 2 2.9 2 3.2
  3. Real GDP growth* 1 1.8 5 3.2
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 1 1.9 1 2.0
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 1 1.2 3 2.3
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 1 1.6 3 2.7
  7. The natural resource endowment* 4 3.2 4 3.2
  8. Profitability* 1 2.1 5 3.5
  9. Regional integration 2 3.0 2 3.1
 10. Proximity to markets 2 2.4 2 2.1
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 1 3.1 1 2.9
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 1 2.8 1 2.8
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 1 3.2 2 3.1
  4. Promotion of competition 2 2.6 2 2.8
  5. Protection of intellectual property 1 2.5 1 2.7
  6. Price controls 1 3.5 3 3.6
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 1 2.3 1 2.2
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 1 2.9 1 2.8
  9. Minority shareholders 1 2.5 1 2.8
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 2 3.4 2 3.4
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 4 3.8 4 3.8
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 1 3.4 2 3.3
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 1 3.1 1 3.3
  5. Government favouritism 1 3.0 1 3.0
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 1 3.8 3 3.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 3 3.7 3 3.7
  3. Ease of trading* 1 3.2 1 3.1
  4. Openness of trade* 5 3.2 5 3.8
  5. Restrictions on the current account 2 4.3 3 4.3
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 3 3.7 3 3.6
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 5 4.5 5 4.2
  3. Value-added tax* 4 3.1 3 3.0
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 4 3.3 4 3.3
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 2 2.7 2 2.7
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 1 2.6 1 2.8
  7. Tax complexity 1 2.3 1 2.3
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 1 2.9 1 3.0
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 1 2.4 1 2.8
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 1 3.3 1 3.4
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 1 2.9 1 2.9
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 2 3.1 2 3.3
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 1 2.6 1 2.8
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 5 4.2 5 4.1
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 3 3.2 3 3.4
  3. Quality of workforce* 3 3.0 3 2.9
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 3 3.0 3 3.1
  5. Health of the workforce* 3 4.0 3 4.0
  6. Level of technical skills 3 3.0 2 3.0
  7. Cost of living* 5 3.5 5 4.1
  8. Incidence of strikes* 2 3.0 2 3.0
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 2 2.6 2 2.7
 10. Extent of wage regulation 3 3.2 4 3.2
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 1 3.5 1 3.6
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 2 3.2 2 2.8
  2. Broadband connection speed* 1 1.3 1 3.0
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 2 2.3 2 2.5
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 3 2.9 3 3.3
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 1 2.3 1 2.5
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 2 2.9 1 3.0
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 2 3.1 2 3.2
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 1 2.0 1 2.3
  9. Rents of office space* 4 3.7 2 3.8
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 2 2.3 1 2.3
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 3 3.0 3 3.3
  3. Scope of e-government* 2 2.8 2 3.3
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 2 3.5 2 3.1
  5. Internet use* 2 2.8 2 3.6
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 1 2.2 1 2.7
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 1 2.2 1 2.3
  8. Research infrastructure* 2 2.8 2 2.8
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

Subject: Economic recovery; Tax rates; Macroeconomics; Technology adoption; Investments; Legislatures; Migration; Foreign exchange rates; Politics; Sanctions; Productivity; Consumption; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Population growth; Hyperinflation; Gross Domestic Product--GDP

Business indexing term: Subject: Economic recovery Tax rates Macroeconomics Foreign exchange rates Sanctions Productivity Consumption International trade Purchasing power parity Hyperinflation Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Industry: 92112 :‎ Legislative Bodies

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Classification: 92112: Legislative Bodies

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Forecast Venezuela May 2022

Publication title: Country Forecast. Venezuela; New York

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Political Science, Business And Economics

ISSN: 09669574

e-ISSN: 20489773

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2714193586

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-may-2022/docview/2714193586/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Australia May 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-australia-may-2022/docview/2735246917/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Australia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Australia+May+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-14&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Australia&amp;rft.issn=02697106&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Australia; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: Australia; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Australia May 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Australia; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02697106

e-ISSN: 20474253

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2735246917

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-australia-may-2022/docview/2735246917/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-11

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Nigeria May 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-nigeria-may-2022/docview/2732461546/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Nigeria&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Nigeria+May+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-11&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Nigeria&amp;rft.issn=02694204&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Nigeria; Africa

Identifier / keyword: Nigeria; Africa

Title: Country Report Nigeria May 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Nigeria; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02694204

e-ISSN: 20475462

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2732461546

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-nigeria-may-2022/docview/2732461546/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-07

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Slovenia 2nd Quarter 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-slovenia-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2732460883/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Slovenia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Slovenia+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-11&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Slovenia&amp;rft.issn=13664131&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Slovenia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Slovenia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Slovenia 2nd Quarter 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Slovenia; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 13664131

e-ISSN: 20475802

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2732460883

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-slovenia-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2732460883/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-07

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Turkey May 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-turkey-may-2022/docview/2714191352/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Long-term outlook 2022-30 2031-50 2022-50 Growth and productivity (% change; annual av) Growth of real GDP per head 2.7 2.0 2.2 Growth of real GDP 3.2 2.5 2.7 Labour productivity growth 1.9 2.3 2.2 In the long term Turkey's economic growth performance is expected to be above that of emerging market peers such as Brazil, Russia and China. [...]Turkey will remain an attractive market for international companies throughout 2022-50. Fact sheet Annual data 2021a Historical averages (%) 2017-21 Population (m) 85.0 Population growth 1.3 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 808 Real GDP growth 4.7 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,642 Real domestic demand growth 3.6 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 9,497 Inflation 14.9 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 31,062 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -2.8 Exchange rate (av) TL: To win seats, parties need at least 10% of the national vote. Since the failed coup, power has been increasingly concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan, the AKP leader, who was re-elected for a second presidential term in June 2018.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Turkey&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Turkey+May+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-11&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Turkey&amp;rft.issn=09668632&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president, and his conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) have dominated Turkey's political scene since coming to power in 2002. During this period they have tightened their grip on authority. Mr Erdogan's re-election as president in 2018 concluded Turkey's shift from a parliamentary to a presidential republic. EIU expects the AKP and Mr Erdogan to remain in power until at least 2023, when the next presidential and parliamentary elections are scheduled. The popularity of the AKP and the president has declined, but they will use their control of national institutions and the media in order to continue to dominate Turkish politics. Domestic and regional political issues will continue to shape Turkey's actions in the foreign policy sphere. Turkey's relations with the EU and the US are likely to remain antagonistic and transactional, rather than strategic, as Turkey performs a delicate balancing act between NATO, of which it is a member, and Russia over the latter's invasion of Ukraine.

Turkey--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.23 6.14 45 58 17 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

- The business environment score for Turkey is lower in the forecast period (2022-26) than in the historical period (2017-21). Turkey falls by 13 places in the global ranking, to 58th, and one place to the bottom (18th) of the regional ranking. Increased powers concentrated under the president and the politicisation of monetary policy have heightened uncertainty about the direction of economic policy. The government favours credit-fuelled economic growth, instead of implementing structural reforms and reorienting growth to a sustainable path. Growing external imbalances leave Turkey's economy vulnerable to shifts in investor sentiment.

Turkey--highlights: Economic outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 11.0 3.0 3.5 3.2 3.1 3.1
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 19.6 50.5 22.2 15.3 14.5 12.8
Budget balance (% of GDP) -2.7 -3.7 -4.2 -3.4 -3.1 -2.7
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -1.8 -3.8 -3.9 -3.5 -3.1 -2.6
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 18.7 16.4 17.3 17.5 15.8 13.8
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 8.9 14.8 15.6 16.0 17.0 17.5

- Following a rebound in 2021 from the economic slump induced by the coronavirus pandemic, we expect real GDP growth to slow to an average of 3.2% per year in 2022-26-short of the government's annual 5% target but close to Turkey's medium-term potential. Poor government policy and a lack of credible institutions have created large external imbalances and triggered repeated Turkish lira sell-offs that have fuelled a surge in consumer price inflation since late 2021. We believe that Turkey will avoid a balance-of-payments crisis during the forecast period, but this risk has risen.

Turkey--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2016 2021 2026
Total 79.8 85.0 87.1
 Male 39.3 42.0 43.0
 Female 40.5 43.1 44.2
Period averages (%)   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth   1.3 0.5
Working-age population growth   1.5 0.5
Labour force growth   1.5 1.7

- The total population is projected to rise from 85m in 2021 to 87m in 2026, with the female population continuing to outnumber that of males. The total population is expected to grow by 0.5% per year during the forecast period (2022-26), compared with 1.3% during the historical period (2017-21).The pace of population growth has slowed in recent decades, owing to the declining birth rate, which in turn reflects the combined impact on fertility rates of higher urbanisation rates, an improvement in the education level of women and wider use of birth control measures. Nevertheless, population growth is high by European standards and the average age is among the lowest, at an estimated 33 years.

Turkey--highlights: Market opportunities   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 808 630 722 824 900 1,001
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 9,497 7,359 8,402 9,547 10,385 11,482
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 471 399 460 538 601 675
Household consumption (US$ bn) 448 377 431 499 553 616
Household consumption per head (US$) 5,260 4,410 5,010 5,780 6,380 7,060

- The large consumer market is one of Turkey's main attractions for businesses. The population is young, growing and inclined to consume rather than save, and average incomes are rising steadily. In 2021 GDP per head was US$9,497 at market exchange rates, up from US$8,490 in 2020, and US$31,062 at purchasing power parity (PPP), up from US$27,082 in 2020. We expect GDP per head to reach US$41,185 at PPP in 2026. Thereafter, GDP per head in Turkey will remain broadly unchanged, at about 65% of the EU average.

Turkey--highlights: Long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 2.7 2.0 2.2
Growth of real GDP 3.2 2.5 2.7
Labour productivity growth 1.9 2.3 2.2

- In the long term Turkey's economic growth performance is expected to be above that of emerging market peers such as Brazil, Russia and China. In 2022-50 we expect Turkey's economy to grow by an annual average of 2.7%, which will be well below the rates recorded in previous decades. Growth in GDP per head terms will be substantially lower, mainly reflecting lower labour productivity growth rates. Income levels will remain well below the EU27 average, but some convergence is likely. As a result, Turkey will remain an attractive market for international companies throughout 2022-50.

Fact sheet Annual data 2021 a Historical averages (%) 2017-21
Population (m) 85.0 Population growth 1.3
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 808 Real GDP growth 4.7
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,642 Real domestic demand growth 3.6
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 9,497 Inflation 14.9
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 31,062 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -2.8
Exchange rate (av) TL:US$ 8.86 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.4
a EIU estimates.
Background: The Turkish Republic was formed in 1923. Nationalist resistance forces led by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk defeated the occupying allies after the first world war, establishing the country's current borders. Since then, Turkey's political and economic structure has been oriented towards the West. The country became a member of the Council of Europe in 1949 and NATO in 1952, and signed an association agreement with the then European Community in 1963. A customs union with the EU took effect in 1996. EU accession negotiations were opened in 2005, but progress has been slow, as Turkey's Western-EU anchor has weakened over the past decade. Under current political circumstances accession will not be possible in 2022-26.
Political structure: Turkey is a centralised secular democratic state, but checks and balances are limited and its secular character has been weakened by the religious-conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP), which came to power in 2002. Turkey has a history of military coups-in 1960, 1971 and 1980-leading to periods of military rule. There was a failed coup in July 2016. Turkey has a presidential system of government, in place since the president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, changed the parliamentary system in 2018, with parliament elected for a five-year term. To win seats, parties need at least 10% of the national vote. Since the failed coup, power has been increasingly concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan, the AKP leader, who was re-elected for a second presidential term in June 2018.
Policy issues: Maintaining macroeconomic stability and stabilising the Turkish lira since the pandemic began in 2020 are the major policy challenges. The government rolled out a large fiscal stimulus to support the economy in 2020 and has used its state banks to expand credit growth. Negative real interest rates and political risk make attracting adequate capital inflows challenging, raising the risks of further lira sell-offs and a balance-of-payments crisis. The Kurdish issue, which has blocked economic development in the south-east, is an important challenge, but peace talks with the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) collapsed in July 2015, and a resurgence in violence followed. Politicisation of the judiciary since the coup attempt has undermined its independence. Corruption and patronage are widespread.
Taxation: The corporation tax rate was raised from 22% to 25% in 2021, falling to 23% in 2022. Personal income tax rates range between 15% and 40%. The top marginal tax rate applies to 2021 incomes of more than TL650,000 (US$41,000). Reducing tax evasion was one of the elements of previous IMF programmes, but compliance remains weak.
Foreign trade: In 2021 goods exports totalled US$224.7bn and imports about US$253.9bn, creating a trade deficit of about US$29.2bn. The current-account deficit narrowed to US$14.9bn (1.8% of GDP).
Major exports 2021 % of total Major imports 2021 % of total
Transport equipment 28.4 Chemicals 17.0
Textiles & clothing 15.3 Machinery 8.6
Agro-industry 9.8 Transport equipment 7.5
Iron & steel 8.9 Fuels 6.7
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
Germany 9.0 China 12.4
US 6.9 Russia 11.1
UK 6.4 Germany 8.3
Italy 5.4 US 5.0
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance The president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and his religiously conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) have dominated Turkish politics since 2002. After replacing Turkey's parliamentary system of government with an executive presidential system in early 2018, they won the presidential and parliamentary elections respectively in June that year, with the support of their coalition partner, the right-wing Nationalist Action Party (MHP). The presidential system concentrates power in the hands of Mr Erdogan, allowing him and the AKP to govern with few checks and balances and clamp down on all forms of political opposition. The relative economic stability that the AKP delivered during the initial phase of its dominance in the early 2000s has been instrumental in the party's electoral successes, as has Mr Erdogan's personal appeal and his religious and conservative outlook, which is shared by much of the electorate. However, the popularity of the president and the AKP has declined in recent years owing to a steep sell-off of the Turkish lira against all major currencies, soaring inflation and a weak labour market. Despite his declining popularity, Mr Erdogan will continue to dominate Turkish politics through a mixture of authoritarianism, control of state resources and the bureaucracy, a tight grip on media, and his still-strong personal support among conservative voters.
Mr Erdogan and the AKP have tightened their grip on authority The opposition is fragmented, with the parties united only by their desire to remove Mr Erdogan from power. The opposition National Alliance was formed ahead of the 2018 elections between the Republican People's Party (CHP; a social democratic party), the Felicity Party (SP; a smaller, conservative Islamic party) and the Good Party (IP; a small, right-wing nationalist party, formed by MHP defectors in late 2017). The pro-Kurdish, left-wing People's Democratic Party (HDP) also won enough votes in the 2018 elections to enter parliament, despite Mr Erdogan's repeated attempts to delegitimise and weaken the movement. The government is seeking to have the HDP closed down for its alleged links with the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), a militant pro-Kurdish group. Mr Erdogan and the AKP suffered a clear blow to their credibility in the local elections held in 2019 when the opposition candidate, Ekrem Imamoglu, increased his margin of victory over Binali Yildirim of the ruling coalition in a rerun of the mayoral election in Istanbul, Turkey's largest city, in June. Since then, two new parties have emerged-the conservative Future Party (GP) and the centrist Democracy and Progress Party (DEVA)-both formed by former senior AKP figures, Ahmet Davutoglu and Ali Babacan respectively.
Parliamentary elections
  Jun 2018   Nov 2015   Jun 2015  
  % of vote Seats % of vote Seats % of vote Seats
Justice and Development Party (AKP) 42.6 290 49.5 317 41.0 258
Republican People's Party (CHP) 22.7 144 25.3 134 25.0 132
Nationalist Action Party (MHP) 11.1 50 11.9 40 16.3 80
Democratic People's Party (HDP) 11.7 67 10.8 59 13.1 80
Good Party (IP) 10 40        
Others 2 5 2.5 0 4.6 0
Total 100 596 100.0 550 100.0 550
Source: Turkish press.
Political outlook: Political stability Mr Erdogan and the AKP have dominated Turkey's political scene since 2002. During this period they have tightened their grip on authority, replacing Turkey's parliamentary system with an executive presidential system in 2018. The economy has become less stable as a result of political tensions, fraught international relations and unorthodox economic policies. This has jeopardised the hard-won improvements in macroeconomic stability on which the AKP built much of its previous electoral success.
Mr Erdogan's popularity has declined as political and social polarisation has deepened, fuelling street protests against the president's handling of the economy, particularly as the cost of living has surged. This, alongside public dissatisfaction with widespread corruption, has damaged the government. However, with parliamentary and presidential elections just over one year away, we expect the administration to step up its suppression of all forms of opposition and dissent, tightening restrictions on freedom of speech and assembly, including social media, as well as other civil and human rights. EIU expects Mr Erdogan to be re-elected in mid-2023 and to continue to dominate Turkish politics over the forecast period through a mixture of authoritarianism, control of state resources and bureaucracy. He will be aided in this by a largely supportive domestic media.
Anti-refugee sentiment is high in Turkey, and the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan will only make this more central to the politics of Mr Erdogan and the AKP. The government has begun discussions on a new constitution, including a strengthening of parliamentary powers. These are likely to include processes to ensure that Mr Erdogan is re-elected in 2023 and that he stays in power beyond 2028, when his second term as directly elected president would end.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness Political and government effectiveness improved in the initial phase of the AKP's rule, which has lasted 20 years. The economy was well managed and significant social reforms were implemented. However, since then intensifying domestic power struggles, the government's response to a resurgence of terrorist violence from mid-2015 and to a failed coup attempt in July 2016, and the transition to a presidential system of government with power concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan have led to an erosion of the rule of law and delayed long-overdue political and economic reforms. In the wake of the failed coup the government introduced emergency rule, which remained in place until July 2018 and allowed it to carry out an extensive purge of personnel in the military, the judiciary, the police force and academic institutions suspected of having links to the movement of an exiled Muslim cleric, Fethullah Gulen. The extent of the purge initially undermined institutional capacity. Most gaps appear to have now been filled, but the judiciary and other previously independent authorities have been politicised. The quality of the bureaucracy remains moderate, and we do not foresee substantial improvement in 2022-26.
Policymaking institutions have become increasingly politicised The increased concentration of power under Mr Erdogan and his party's control of parliament mean that policy predictability and its overall long-term suitability, especially from the perspective of foreign investors, are suboptimal. Since 2013 economic policymaking institutions have become increasingly politicised-a feature that will persist in the medium term. The Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) will remain subject to pressure from Mr Erdogan's credit-driven-growth approach to economic policymaking. The economic downturn in 2020 led to the biggest credit growth boom in a decade, facilitated by Turkey's state banks and a politicised central bank. In November 2020 Mr Erdogan made a step towards restoring policy normality and transparency by appointing a former finance minister, Naci Agbal (who is known for championing orthodox monetary policies), as central bank governor. However, he was replaced just four months later (in March 2021) by Sahap Kavcioglu, a critic of Mr Agbal's policies, adding to the unpredictability of Turkey's policies and damaging financial market sentiment.
Concerns about the impartiality and efficiency of the legal system are unlikely to be resolved over the forecast period, given the continued politicisation of the judiciary. An AKP constitutional reform package, which was approved by referendum in 2010, changed the appointment procedure and composition of the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors (HSYK) and the Constitutional Court. The changes facilitated the replacement of conservative secularist-nationalists in the judiciary with Gulenists, who, until 2013, were close allies of the AKP. Shortcomings in the judicial process were highlighted in coup plot investigations and trials that began in 2007. These were only addressed at appeal stage and after suspected Gulenists in the judiciary began investigating allegations of government corruption in late 2013. The purge of Gulenists from the judiciary accelerated after the failed coup in 2016. The upheaval is likely to increase uncertainty in the judicial process and further prolong the resolution of cases.
Courts tend to interpret the law in favour of the state The courts' tendency to interpret the law in favour of the state and at the expense of the individual is unlikely to change, especially in cases involving minority rights and freedom of speech. In our business environment rankings we expect the transparency and fairness of the judicial process to remain poor and its efficiency to deteriorate in 2022-26.
Political outlook: Election watch The next presidential and parliamentary elections will be held no later than mid-2023. The president has said repeatedly that these elections will not be brought forward. As Turkey's economy continues to suffer, there is a low possibility of snap elections. Several parties are now competing against Mr Erdogan for conservative and right-of-centre votes. Allied with the perennial main opposition party, the Republican People's Party (CHP), they could pose a substantial threat to the AKP and its right-wing ally, the Nationalist Action Party (MHP). Mr Erdogan is currently leading in presidential election polls, but his support is below the 50% threshold to avoid a two-candidate second-round run-off.
We expect Mr Erdogan and the AKP to win the next presidential and parliamentary elections, but they are likely to be close contests. He and his party are still popular among Turkey's relatively strong conservative voter base. More importantly, the president has control of the media and state institutions. A legal case to close Turkey's third-largest political party, the pro-Kurdish Peoples' Democratic Party (HDP), is pending before the Constitutional Court over the party's alleged ties to the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK). If the court rules against the HDP and bans its members from politics before the elections, as seems likely, this would severely weaken the opposition. The government's strategy of dividing the opposition and its use of the police to quell public protests from all kinds of opposition groups, as well as changes introduced to the electoral law (including adjustments to the vote threshold to enter parliament), also represent important challenges for the opposition.
Political outlook: International relations Under the AKP and Mr Erdogan, Turkey has been seeking to bolster its standing as a regional power in the Middle East and extend its influence in the South Caucasus without provoking Russia, with which it has developed closer ties since 2016. The government's assertive foreign policy remains popular with many voters in Turkey and has helped to distract attention from domestic economic and political concerns. However, this approach has isolated Turkey in the Middle East, as well as straining relations with its traditional Western allies, the US and the EU, and NATO, of which it is a member. In particular, Turkey's purchase of the Russian-made S-400 defence system in 2019 put Turkish-US relations under severe strain, leading to the introduction of mild US sanctions in December 2020, with the threat of stronger action if the missile system is activated. Recently, the fragility of the Turkish economy and the vulnerability of the lira have pushed Turkey to make efforts to build bridges with some countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Israel, with which its relations had previously deteriorated sharply.
For economic reasons, Turkey is also trying to perform a delicate balancing act between the West and Russia over the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Turkey has supplied military equipment to Ukraine and, in line with NATO's position, has strongly condemned Russia's military operations in the country. However, the Turkish government has also opposed the imposition of Western sanctions on Russia. Having belatedly stated that, with Russia and Ukraine at war, it could use its powers under the 1936 Montreux Convention to prevent military vessels from entering the Black Sea through the Dardanelles and the Bosporus straits, the government is unlikely to take action that would provoke Russian retaliation. Such retaliation could include actions against Turkish positions in Syria, where Russia and Turkey extend military support to the government and opposition elements, respectively, or the disruption of oil and gas supplies to Turkey, much of which come from Russia.
Human rights are a leading issue in Turkish-EU relations, alongside Cyprus and territorial rights in the eastern Mediterranean. EU accession talks with Turkey have been in the doldrums for several years but formally remain active, despite calls from some member states for the talks to be suspended over human-rights issues. Tensions with neighbouring Greece, also a member of NATO, are endemic but escalated sharply in 2020-21, largely over Turkey's hydrocarbons exploration activity in disputed waters in the gas-rich eastern Mediterranean. Turkey has since paused its activities in the disputed waters but, with elections due to be held in both countries in mid-2023, tensions are likely to escalate again over the next 12 months.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
Overall position 6.23 6.14 45 58 17 18
Political environment 4.5 3.6 66 74 18 18
 Political stability 4.4 3.3 71 74 18 18
 Political effectiveness 4.5 3.9 50 69 18 18
Macroeconomic environment 5.2 4.4 70 74 18 18
Market opportunities 7.3 7.1 5 18 2 7
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 6.0 6.0 39 44 15 17
Policy towards foreign investment 6.4 6.0 46 57 16 18
Foreign trade & exchange controls 8.2 8.7 37 27 17 12
Taxes 6.1 6.1 44 56 11 13
Financing 7.0 6.3 25 52 12 18
The labour market 6.4 6.6 33 32 13 11
Infrastructure 4.8 6.0 57 51 18 18
Technological readiness 6.6 6.9 39 42 16 15
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
EIU's business environment score for Turkey is lower in the forecast period (2022-26) than in the historical period (2017-21). Turkey falls by 13 places in the global ranking, to 58th, and one place to the bottom (18th) of the regional ranking. Increased powers concentrated under the president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and the politicisation of monetary policy have heightened uncertainty about the direction of economic policy. The lira depreciated sharply again in 2021, and inflation has surged. We expect a combination of low-interest-rate policies and unpredictable, ad hoc policymaking to continue at least up to the elections in 2023. Thereafter, a return to more orthodox policymaking with a longer-term perspective is possible, but policy credibility will take time to rebuild. Moreover, Turkey's weak external balances will continue to leave the economy vulnerable to changes in global financial conditions.
The economy remains vulnerable to sharp shifts in investor confidence Major attractions for investors include Turkey's geographic location, its potential market size, its young and growing population, a customs union with the EU, and a large and dynamic private sector. Attracting foreign investment and main-taining a free market economy will also remain government priorities. However, the sharp depreciation of the lira and the unpredictability of economic policymaking have increased the possibility of a crisis, although this is not our core forecast. In the event of a crisis the authorities could be forced to introduce fully fledged capital-account restrictions, given the political unacceptability of the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) raising interest rates or accepting an IMF programme to reassure investors. Some of the shortcomings of the business environment, such as the politicisation of regulatory bodies and the judicial system, as well as cronyism and corruption, could start to be addressed in the event of a change of government, but challenges in areas such as labour market skills and tax reform will persist regardless of the government in power.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Turkey's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: The private sector receives some support amid challenging economic conditions, with elections due by mid-2023, but incentive policies may be inconsistent. Political patronage and regulatory uncertainty persist.
2024-26: In several sectors, competition remains limited and/or state ownership continues to play an important role.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Despite efforts to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) in key sectors, concerns about political and economic instability, international relations and other aspects of the business environment will continue to deter some investors.
2024-26: Attracting FDI remains a priority. A more predictable political, policy and regulatory environment could boost inflows.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: The weak lira supports exports. Turkey seeks to avoid implementing Western sanctions on Russia.
2024-26: Negotiations with the EU to update the customs union are protracted, even if Turkish-EU relations improve.
Taxes 2022-23: Major tax hikes will be avoided before the 2023 elections. The standard rate of corporation tax may revert to 20%.
2024-26: Taxes may change less frequently, but under-reporting and non-payment will persist.
Financing 2022-23: The government uses state banks, guarantees and prudential requirements to manage credit growth.
2024-26: Reliance on largely short-term capital inflows amid tighter global liquidity continues. Access to credit may become more difficult, even without a full return to monetary orthodoxy. Banks still face significant market and credit risks.
The labour market 2022-23: Unemployment is high, and workforce participation is low. The minimum wage may increase in real terms.
2024-26: Efforts may resume to reform severance pay, promote flexible employment and tackle informality and skills gaps.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Expansion of Istanbul airport is operational. The Ukraine crisis speeds up plans to improve security of energy supply.
2024-26: Gradual progress is made on road, rail and urban infrastructure projects (particularly in Istanbul and industrial zones), but gaps and bottlenecks persist. Telecommunications infrastructure improves
Technological readiness 2022-23: Spending on research and development remains moderate, at about 1% of GDP, holding back efforts to move the economy up the value-added ladder.
2024-26: Broadband penetration and internet speeds improve. Increased focus on innovation and design.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.2 4.4 70 74 18 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Poor policymaking will continue to fuel instability The macroeconomic environment is highly unstable, reflecting unorthodox and unpredictable policymaking. In late 2021, despite accelerating inflation, a policy of low interest rates was imposed on the central bank. The sharp depreciation of the lira that followed combined with rising commodity prices to lift inflation above 60% by March 2022. Real interest rates are deeply negative, and the government is set to maintain its current policies. High import prices, global monetary tightening, weak investor confidence and likely domestic demand for foreign exchange threaten to drain Turkey's limited foreign-exchange reserves, further weaken the lira and continue the spiral of currency instability and high inflation, ultimately eroding consumer spending power and causing a recession. In an effort to counter this risk, and to maintain economic activity and a degree of political support, the government has adopted ad hoc measures such as the introduction of government-protected lira deposit accounts, which yield no less than they would earn if held in hard currencies. Further populist measures or unorthodox interventions could be adopted ahead of the elections in 2023. Although we expect real GDP growth to slow in 2022, the current-account deficit will widen and the budget shortfall is forecast to expand. Any further weakening of the lira will also increase the burden of government and corporate debt, much of which is denominated in foreign currencies. Although the current policies are unsustainable in the long term, reversing them before or after the elections without triggering a recession and financial risks would require careful management. We expect the lira to depreciate throughout the forecast period and inflation to return to single figures only in 2026.
Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.0 6.0 39 44 15 17
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The government broadly supports private-sector investment Turkey has a large and dynamic private sector. Private property is generally well protected, although the Savings Deposit Guarantee Fund (SDIF) acts as administrator for more than 700 small and medium-sized firms taken over after the 2016 coup attempt. The government is broadly supportive of the private sector, providing a range of incentives for investments, with an emphasis on underdeveloped regions, technology, the production of currently imported intermediary goods and "strategic" sectors (such as defence, aerospace, automotive and pharmaceuticals). Bank lending to small and medium-scale industry, in particular, is encouraged through government credit guarantees. However, the country's score and ranking in this category will continue to be constrained by the significant role of the state in many sectors, political patronage and corruption, the politicisation of regulatory bodies and the judicial system, and other barriers to free competition.

- Free competition will remain the norm in most sectors. The Competition Board has power over mergers and acquisitions, price-fixing and abuse of market position. Like most other regulatory agencies, however, the Board may continue to have limited independence, as it is appointed by the president, and its decisions and investigations may be influenced by government policies and preferences.
- Price controls will continue to operate for various reasons in electricity, gas, petroleum, telecoms and pharmaceuticals, and may be employed temporarily in other sectors to combat inflation. Unfair competition will persist in some other sectors owing to the use of informal labour, poor protection of intellectual property rights and smuggling. Some progress may be made towards enforcing intellectual property rights, which have faced challenges despite the unified industrial property law that came into force in January 2017. Starting and running a business is likely to remain relatively cumbersome.
- Political patronage and exclusive business networks will continue to play a significant role in business life. Firms close to government circles may be boldest in entering public tenders or operating in sectors where major decisions are taken by politicians, regulators or bureaucrats. Industrial policies such as incentives for large investments may facilitate favouritism and hinder competition. The "national car" project, TOGG, undertaken by a private-sector consortium at the instigation of the government, with the Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges as a shareholder, may be regarded as a form of unfair competition in the automotive sector.
- Turkey has a long history of privatisation in a wide range of sectors. However, we expect the slow pace of privatisation since 2014 to continue during the forecast period (except for state-owned land), owing to market volatility and the government's focus on retaining control and enhancing the value of strategic assets. Control of the three main state banks-Halkbank, Ziraat and VakifBank-looks set to remain in government hands, and these may sometimes be used as a source of patronage. The government and public companies are also likely to retain a significant position in mining, the defence industry, postal services, insurance, tea and sugar, as well as water, infrastructure and social services (including healthcare and education). The state will retain control of Turkish Airlines, with a 49% stake, as well as the homebuilder TOKI and the broadcaster TRT. However, some of the businesses under SDIF administration may be sold off.

The state will continue to own important enterprises in many sectors
- The Turkey Wealth Fund (TWF), established in 2016, has become a holding company for many of the key state enterprises. The initial stated goal was to finance large public works by using its assets as collateral. Its current mandate is to "enhance the value of its assets, provide equity to strategic investments ... support Turkey's international economic objectives, and reinforce the improvement and deepening of financial markets". Aside from its impact on fiscal transparency, the establishment of the TWF represents a shift from a policy of selling state assets to one of managing them actively, potentially including share sales but also new investments. The fund could be used to inject cash and take controlling stakes in companies for policy or political reasons.
- Energy markets may remain only partly liberalised. Gas is still mostly imported and sold on by the state pipeline company, Botas, to industry, power plants or (for domestic consumption) local monopolies. Consumer electricity markets became local monopolies after privatisation, but choice over power providers has since increased. In power generation, privatised and privately developed plants account for 75% of installed capacity, and the privatisation of other plants continues, resulting in a competitive market, although some plants and sources of energy enjoy extra guarantees and incentives.
- In telecommunications, Turk Telekom (TT) will continue to dominate infrastructure as well as the fixed line and fixed broadband market. TT was partly privatised in 2005, but owing to the buyer's debt-repayment challenges it eventually came to be 55%-owned by creditor banks. In March 2022 the banks sold their stake to the TWF. TT has two major competitors in mobile telephony, Vodafone and Turkcell, but the latter is also state-controlled after the TWF acquired a 26% stake in 2020.
- Besides privatisation, build-operate-transfer/public-private partnership schemes have increased the role of the private sector, notably in the management of major transport facilities and hospitals. These schemes have become controversial and may be used sparingly in future.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.4 6.0 46 57 16 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Heavy reliance on foreign-capital inflows increases incentive to attract FDI Turkey's low savings rate and heavy dependency on foreign-capital inflows makes attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) a priority, and the government and most sections of Turkish society have generally accepted and respected foreign ownership in industry and services. There have been no restrictions on repatriation of profits, even at times of financial market stress. The potential size of the domestic market remains a key attraction. The government will especially promote FDI in greenfield and expansion projects that can further its industrial policy goals, including import substitution and technological innovation. Low asset valuations as a result of the weakness of the lira may also attract investors, particularly to export-oriented firms that have receipts in US dollars. Foreign investors have the same access to government incentives as domestic investors do. Depending on the size and duration of their investments, foreign investors-including investors in real estate and the financial markets-are able to acquire citizenship. Plans to cut red tape and ongoing efforts to streamline the legal system would benefit both foreign and domestic businesses.

- Despite Turkey's openness to FDI, its score in this category falls in the forecast period, as we expect little progress on reforms aimed at reducing macroeconomic instability risk or on removing the main deterrents to foreign investment. Restrictions on foreign ownership in a few areas, including broadcasting and civil aviation, are likely to remain, and the courts and sections of the public are occasionally hostile towards foreign investors when environmental issues or natural resources are at stake. Other deterrents include the unpredictability of legislation, regulation, taxation and the legal system, and concerns about corruption and the risk of rivals enjoying greater political patronage.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
8.2 8.7 37 27 17 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Turkey has a customs union with the EU and is likely to sign more FTAs Turkey's global ranking for foreign trade rises to 27th in the forecast period, as exports and imports will continue to grow. As a member of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) with a customs union with the EU, Turkey is committed to a broadly open trading regime. Under the 1996 union, Turkey has customs-free trade in manufactured goods with EU member states and has adopted the EU common customs tariff. Turkey has bilateral free-trade agreements (FTAs) with the European Free-Trade Association (EFTA). Following the UK's exit from the EU, Turkey and the UK have also signed an FTA, which took effect in 2021. In total, Turkey has active FTAs with 22 countries or blocs, mostly in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, but also including South Korea, Singapore and Chile. It is negotiating or pursuing FTAs with many other partners, especially countries such as Canada, Mexico and Japan that have FTAs with the EU.

- The pandemic depressed global trade flows in 2020, hurting Turkey's export sectors. However, lira weakness made exports more competitive ahead of the global recovery from 2021. Turkey also appears to be benefiting from "near-shoring" trends, as European buyers of manufactured goods diversify their suppliers away from China and other Asian countries to reduce the fragility of their supply chains. Disruption to trade is likely as a result of the war in Ukraine, but Turkey has sought to avoid implementing Western sanctions against Russia.
- Turkey's import regime reflects the EU's common customs tariff and the bloc's FTAs. In recent years there has been an increase in short-term protective measures aimed at limiting imports of textiles, petrochemicals and many other items from non-EU countries, mainly lower-cost countries. This situation parallels the government's efforts to encourage domestic production of items currently imported in large quantities. However, we believe that the government is unlikely to resort to outright protectionism.
- Some imported agricultural products face high tariffs, or-like cereals, and livestock or meat-are only permitted to the extent that domestic supply is insufficient. In recent years the authorities have tinkered with tariffs and quotas in response to high food price inflation. This trend may continue, although the Russia-Ukraine war between two important suppliers of agricultural commodities has amplified calls to protect and support agriculture for food security.
- In 2015 Turkey and the EU agreed to revisit the current customs union agreement with a view to expanding it to potentially cover agricultural goods, services and public procurement, but talks have not yet started. Some EU politicians have suggested that talks should be linked to political criteria. If this were to be the case, the chances of reaching an agreement during the forecast period would be low. Despite the customs union, Turkey refuses to grant Greek Cypriot ships and planes access to its ports and airports unless the EU facilitates direct trade between the EU and the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC), which is currently recognised only by Turkey. This stalemate is set to continue in the absence of a Cyprus settlement. Similarly, without progress in its EU accession negotiations, Turkey is unlikely to lift restrictions on EU meat and used-car imports, eliminate discriminatory taxes on alcoholic drinks and tobacco products, or open up trade in services.

The likelihood of capital controls being imposed has increased, albeit slightly
- The lira has been fully convertible since 1989, and the authorities have not considered the use of capital controls, even during periods of severe exchange-rate and financial market volatility, being keenly aware of the reputational damage that this would cause. However, the sharp depreciation of the lira in 2020-21 and the unpredictability of policymaking have raised the risk of such controls being introduced during the forecast period. In January 2022 the CBT imposed the forced conversion into Turkish lira of 25% of hard-currency export earnings, which is in itself a (mild) form of capital control. In mid-April it raised the share to 40%.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.1 6.1 44 56 11 13
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Turkey's score in this category remains unchanged for 2022-26, but its global ranking falls by 12 places, to 56th, owing to improvements in countries with similar rankings. According to OECD figures, tax revenue (including social security contributions) comprised 23.9% of GDP in 2020, compared with an OECD average of 33.4% (2019 data). The relatively low tax take reflects high levels of informality, under-reporting and non-payment-which have been encouraged by frequent amnesties and opportunities to restructure debts to the government-as well as the multiple exemptions and exceptions introduced, for example to encourage investment in underdeveloped regions, strategic sectors and technological innovation. According to central government budget figures (excluding social-security contributions), corporation tax accounted for 11.4% of total tax receipts in 2021, up from just below 10% until 2017, and personal income tax for 21.2%. The majority of tax income still comes from indirect taxes, primarily value-added tax (VAT) and special consumption tax (SCT), which is charged on a range of goods and services from fuels to carbonated drinks.
The corporation tax rate has increased, but indirect taxes still dominate
- Changes in the amounts and rates of taxes, tax incentives and tax procedures are frequent, and this is likely to continue. In response to the 2018 currency crisis, the corporation tax rate of 20% was temporarily raised to 22% for 2018, 2019 and 2020. Owing to the pandemic it was then temporarily set at 25% for 2021 and 23% for 2022. A law passed in April 2022 raised the rate to 25% for financial institutions. Personal income tax rates range from 15% to 40%. For 2022 the portion of employees' earnings exempt from income tax was raised to the equivalent of the minimum wage. VAT is levied at a standard rate of 18%, with lower rates of 8% and 1% for some items. The lists of items to which these rates apply are subject to adjustment: in 2020, for example, VAT was lowered for sectors such as retail, automotive and logistics that were hit hard by the pandemic, and in 2022 VAT has been lowered on many food items and other household essentials in a bid to cushion households against inflation. SCT rates are also often adjusted.

Frequent changes in taxation are likely to continue without any major reform
- Efforts to address informality and improve tax collection are unlikely to make rapid progress in the uncertain macroeconomic and political environment. Plans to simplify the tax system are also unlikely to be implemented. In view of the government's revenue needs, the corporation tax rate may continue to be set above 20% for some or all sectors in 2023 and beyond. Foreign firms will continue to pay taxes in the same way as Turkish companies. Turkey has agreements to prevent double taxation with almost all its trading partners.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
7.0 6.3 25 52 12 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Government uses state banks and credit guarantees to support credit growth Turkey's financing score and rankings deteriorate sharply during the forecast period. Reforms introduced under the guidance of the IMF and the World Bank in the wake of the financial crisis in Turkey in 2000-01 transformed the banking sector, which become well regulated, well capitalised and profitable. In recent years, however, the sector has become vulnerable to political interference, economic instability, financial market volatility, and high levels of private-sector foreign-currency debt. Bank assets and loans (excluding financial sector loans) amounted to nearly 130% of GDP and 70% of GDP respectively at end-2021. Although there are more than 50 conventional and participation (Islamic) banks, many with foreign ownership, the three state-controlled banks and four large private banks account for about 75% of total assets. In recent years the government has encouraged bank lending through a mix of political pressure, loose monetary policy, reserve requirement adjustments and credit guarantees. In response, the state banks, which are also conduits for subsidised lending to agriculture and small businesses, have lowered credit rates and expanded their loan books. The government injected the equivalent of more than US$10bn into the state banks between 2020 and early 2022 in the form of government bonds. Owing to the government's low-interest-rate policy and high inflation, bank deposit and credit rates have been negative in real terms since late 2021. Since December 2021, in an effort to stabilise the lira, banks have been encouraged to offer "exchange rate-protected" lira-denominated time deposits carrying a government-underwritten guarantee that the yield will be no less than that on foreign-currency deposits. This arrangement is to continue until end-2022.
Major banks are well capitalised, but face market and credit risks
- Despite low interest rates, growth in bank lending may be constrained by a possible increase in borrowing by the government and by concerns about credit quality-the ability of both businesses and consumers to repay their debts in the current macroeconomic environment-as well as the rising cost and reduced availability of foreign borrowing. The government will pursue pro-credit policies to support the private sector and growth, but may rein these in at times for fear of exacerbating external imbalances, exchange-rate weakness and inflation.
- Although nearly 60% of banks' deposits, as well as their foreign borrowing, are in foreign currency, so are a significant portion of their loans and other assets (including some of their government bonds). Their direct exposure to foreign exchange risk is therefore limited, as regulation requires. However, lira weakness has increased the risk of non-payment by customers of foreign-currency loans.
- As at February 2022, the Tier 1 capital-adequacy ratio of Turkish banks was a comfortable 14.2% of risk-weighted assets, according to the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency, and non-performing loans (NPLs) were only 3.2%, notwithstanding the termination of government policy requiring banks to treat debtors more leniently. Some NPLs have been restructured or sold off to asset management companies. Banks are vulnerable to monetary policy tightening and a sudden increase in interest rates. The government has shown antipathy to private banks in the past and may seek to limit their profits. Corporation tax for financial institutions has been raised to 25% from 2022.

Foreign investors have sold off Turkish assets amid currency volatility
- Although banking dominates, the financial sector also includes a liquid equity market, a smaller corporate bond market, leasing, factoring and consumer finance companies, and a range of investment funds and companies. In 2021 the Borsa Istanbul had a record 52 initial public offerings, and low interest rates have increased local interest. However, there has been a sell-off by foreign investors in recent years, and the importance of the banking sector will continue to prevail over market-based finance throughout the forecast horizon.
- To boost domestic savings with longer maturities, the government has strongly supported private pensions. At end-2021 funds amounted to about 3.2% of GDP. In January 2022 the state subsidy was raised from 25% to 30% of pension contributions, paving the way for further growth from this still-modest base.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.4 6.6 33 32 13 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Turkey's labour market score improves slightly in the forecast period. The country has a large, young labour pool. However, workforce participation is low (51.4% in 2021), owing partly to traditions that discourage female employment. Despite rising years of formal education, average education and skills levels remain below average European standards, and mismatches between education and labour market needs persist. Employment of foreigners has risen but is still low and deterred by procedures and conditions. Some restrictions on union membership and strikes are incompatible with international norms, but are unlikely to be lifted under the current government.
Low workforce participation, skills gaps and widespread informality will persist
- The common use of informal employment and subcontracting to avoid tax, legal obligations and rigidities creates unfair competition, undermines safety standards and hinders productivity gains. This situation is unlikely to change in the medium term. In formal employment, working hours and conditions are generally regulated and inflexible. We expect the use of flexible contracts to increase only slowly. Current labour market and education and training policies may raise skills levels, but only gradually. Increased workforce participation will also depend on job creation and wages. Turkey's official unemployment rate (excluding Syrian refugees) fell from 13.2% in 2020 to 12% in 2021 owing to strong economic growth in the wake of the coronavirus crisis, but we do not expect unemployment to fall below 10% in the forecast period.
- The large pool of labour and the limited extent of trade union activity and collective bargaining constrain wages. The government has the final word on the minimum wage, as well as public service pay and pensions, but must take account of inflation and political expediency. The 50.5% rise in the minimum wage for 2022, to TL4,253 (US$270) per month, will barely compensate for inflation. The cost to employers has been cushioned by exempting a larger portion of employees' earnings from income tax. This measure and various conditional subsidies for social-security contributions are likely to remain in place. A generous minimum wage hike ahead of the 2023 elections may be followed by a degree of restraint in later years.
- The Unemployment Fund finances active employment policies and was used temporarily to protect employment during the pandemic. It provides limited support for people made redundant, but this may be gradually increased. Firms argue that the severance pay system, which makes employers liable to pay substantial lump sums to employees who retire, resign or are made redundant, is too generous, hindering formal hiring. Reform proposals have centred on creating a national severance pay fund with employer contributions, but trade unions are opposed. The issue will return to the agenda and changes may be made within the forecast period.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.8 6.0 57 51 18 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Despite some spectacular transport projects, shortcomings persist Turkey's infrastructure score and ranking are improving, but the country still ranks only 51st in the world in the forecast period. Numerous large transport infrastructure projects have been completed in recent years, in many cases through public-private partnership schemes. These include airports (led by the giant Istanbul Airport), motorways, Bosporus crossings, and bridges across the Gulf of Izmit and the Dardanelles. The controversial Canal Istanbul, which would link the Black Sea to the Sea of Marmara, and an ambitious three-tier undersea tunnel across the Bosporus remain largely on the drawing board and will face financing difficulties. Only parts of the long-planned high-speed rail network have been completed. Despite restructuring, the state dominates rail transport, with only a few freight rail transport licences awarded to private operators.

- The quality of transport infrastructure in general remains mixed-not least in less developed regions-and will continue to lag EU standards, especially in view of the long distances between cities. A law adopted in January 2022 allows the management rights of the operators of some seaports to be extended to 49 years, which may boost investment to prevent bottlenecks and increase capacity.
- Urban areas face a range of shortcomings, such as vulnerability to earth-quakes and floods, overcrowding and congestion, insufficient use of rail systems, strains on water supplies, and inadequate waste and sewerage management systems. Given the investments needed, improvements are likely to be piecemeal.
- Fixed-line broadband internet access has grown rapidly, but, at 21.4% in 2021, the penetration rate is well below the average of 30-40% for most other European countries. The roll-out of fibre and cable connections has been relatively slow. Although mobile broadband is much more widespread, the introduction of fifth-generation (5G) networks has repeatedly been delayed. Obstacles related to financing and leadership may be overcome during the forecast period with the help of better co-operation among the major telecommunications companies.
- Despite extensive energy sector privatisation and market liberalisation, the state still plays a significant role, notably in importing gas and generating electricity, as well as regulating markets and consumer prices. Natural gas is widely available, and installed power generation capacity has risen, including from renewable sources. However, the regulatory environment is still un-predictable, and local distribution companies cannot always prevent blackouts. More investment is needed to increase energy efficiency, cut transmission and distribution losses, and reduce dependence on (mainly imported) fossil fuels.
- In addition to domestic onshore activity, Turkish Petroleum, a state-run firm, has been exploring and drilling in the Black Sea. Drilling in the eastern Mediterranean is on hold after tensions with Cyprus, Greece and the EU. The four reactors at the Akkuyu nuclear plant, Turkey's first, which is being built by an arm of Russia's Rosatom in Mersin province, are due to come on-stream in 2023-26.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
6.6 6.9 39 42 16 15
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
E-commerce grew rapidly during the coronavirus pandemic We expect improvements in technological readiness in Turkey, but these will be slower than in some other countries amid constraints on investment, consumer demand, institutional capacities, workforce qualifications and infrastructure. Turkey will remain behind most developed countries and EU members, as well as the stronger developing economies in Asia, but on a par with Greece and ahead of Bulgaria, Romania and Serbia (all ranked 52nd globally)-some of its main competitors for FDI. Turkey has embraced digital technology in many areas, including government, commerce and finance. E-commerce was already growing rapidly, albeit from a low base, before the pandemic, reflecting high levels of internet and credit-card use and mobile-phone penetration, as well as foreign and domestic investment in reliable, user-friendly platforms. Online sales soared in lira terms by 66% in 2020 and 69% in 2021, accounting for 17.7% of total retail trade in 2021. This growth will continue at a slower pace in the forecast period.

- According to the Information and Communication Technologies Authority, the market regulator, mobile broadband penetration reached 82.7% in the fourth quarter of 2021 and fixed broadband penetration (per head of population) 21.4%. Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat) survey results indicate that 92% of households had access to the internet in 2021, up from 90.7% in 2020. Meanwhile, 93% of enterprises had a fixed broadband connection. These figures are likely to edge up further in the forecast period.
- There are 92 technology development zones (77 already active); significant tax advantages for research and development (R&D); and a range of other govern-ment incentives, programmes and projects for the use of technology in industry. Overall, however, Turkey remains a relatively low-tech economy. In 2021 high-tech industries accounted for 3% of manufacturing sector export revenue and medium-high technology industries for 33.4%, according to TurkStat. R&D spending amounted to 1.09% of GDP in 2020. Despite low public-sector spending on R&D, foreign investment will spur a modest increase in technological adoption.

Economic forecast: Policy trends Turkey's economy has shown resilience during previous bouts of political instability and market volatility, owing to a prudent approach to the public finances, effective capitalisation of the banking sector, and a dynamic and diversified private sector. However, the country's heavy reliance on largely short-term capital inflows to meet its large external financing requirement and its dependence on imported oil and gas, as well as its limited foreign-currency reserves and unorthodox monetary policy, leave the economy vulnerable to external shocks and shifts in international financial-risk aversion. Escalating tension between Russia and NATO over Russia's invasion of Ukraine have pushed up global energy prices sharply and revived investors' concerns about the sustainability of Turkey's external position. The Ukraine crisis, combined with the prospect of global monetary tightening, could prove to be highly destabilising for Turkey's already fragile economy, which is still dealing with the aftermath of the collapse of the lira in late 2021.
After a brief flirtation with monetary policy orthodoxy from November 2020 to March 2021, the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) under its new governor, Sahap Kavcioglu, returned to path of low interest rates preferred by the president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. The authorities believe that low rates will further encourage the use of credit by industry, stimulating investment and production, while the weak lira increases Turkey's export competitiveness and deters imports, thereby narrowing the country's perennial current-account deficit. However, this high-risk strategy eventually triggered a collapse in the external value of the lira in November-December 2021 and a further surge in the rate of consumer price inflation, to 61.1% in March 2022. With elections due by mid-2023, we believe that a return to orthodox policies in the short term is unlikely, although financial market instability could leave the CBT with no choice but to raise its policy interest rate at some point. In the meantime, the government's strategy is likely to focus on ad hoc measures to try to avoid a further loss of investor confidence, stabilise the lira and shore up the CBT's depleted foreign-currency reserves. The introduction of protected lira deposit accounts, which could prove costly to the Treasury, combined with hefty central bank intervention in the currency market, helped to bring the lira back from an all-time low of almost TL18:US$1 in mid-December to an average of TL13.5:US$1 in January 2022. However, the Ukraine crisis has exerted renewed pressure on the lira, which traded at about TL14.70:US$1 in April, compared with an average of TL13.75:US$1 in February.
If, as EIU expects, external credit conditions become less favourable, attracting adequate capital inflows will become even harder. A further loss of confidence would trigger renewed currency volatility and the risk of an eventual foreign-exchange shortage, leading to a balance-of-payments crisis. In order to avoid such a crisis, the government would be forced to either raise interest rates sharply or take other steps, such as another forced conversion of hard-currency export earnings or even fully fledged capital controls. Having set the forced conversion rate at 25% of hard-currency earnings in January 2022, the central bank raised it to 40% in mid-April to shore up foreign-exchange reserves.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Government expenditure 22.4 21.4 22.1 21.8 21.9 21.5
Government revenue 19.7 17.8 17.9 18.5 18.7 18.8
Budget balance -2.7 -3.7 -4.2 -3.4 -3.1 -2.7
Government debt 42.3 43.2 43.8 42.6 41.1 39.7
We expect the fiscal deficit to widen to 3.7% of GDP in 2022, from 2.7% in 2021. Mr Erdogan has ordered a 50% rise in the net minimum wage for 2022, and pensions and public-sector pay have been increased by at least 25%, with further increments due at mid-year. This will be coupled with the abolition of income tax on the minimum wage, credit subsidies and compensation due to holders of protected lira-denominated deposits. With elections due in 2023, we expect the deficit to remain wide by historical standards, at 4.2% of GDP. It will then narrow to an average of 3.1% of GDP in 2024-26, as we expect the government to reintroduce a more prudent approach to the public finances in an effort to recover policy credibility. Despite strong economic growth and a relatively small budget deficit, the government debt/GDP ratio rose slightly in 2021, to 42.3%. We expect it to increase moderately in 2022-23, before easing to just under 40% at the end of the forecast period, reflecting tighter post-election fiscal policy.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
3-month money market rate (av) 18.7 16.4 17.3 17.5 15.8 13.8
Deposit rate (av) 18.2 19.6 19.6 16.5 10.5 9.0
In September-December 2021 the CBT, under pressure from Mr Erdogan, cut its headline interest rate-the one-week repurchase (repo) interest rate-by a total of 500 basis points to 14%, pushing real rates deep into negative territory. With elections due in 2023, we expect the rate to be left unchanged in 2022 and in the first half of next year, with a small hike in the second half of 2023 to avert a further collapse of the lira, which will come under pressure as global credit conditions are tightened further. In line with slowing inflation, we expect rate cuts in 2024-26. Turkey has lost about 20% of its foreign-exchange reserves since 2018, and net reserves are far lower than gross reserves owing to its foreign-exchange obligations to banks.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Economic growth (%)
US GDP 5.7 3.0 1.9 1.7 1.9 1.7
OECD GDP 5.2 3.0 2.2 2.0 1.9 1.8
EU27 GDP 5.3 2.9 2.4 2.1 1.9 1.9
World GDP 5.7 3.3 3.1 2.8 2.6 2.6
World trade 10.5 4.9 4.7 4.0 3.6 3.6
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 4.7 7.2 2.8 2.1 2.1 2.1
OECD CPI 3.6 7.0 3.1 2.3 2.2 2.2
EU27 CPI 2.8 6.3 2.5 2.0 1.9 1.9
Manufactures (measured in US$) 5.9 1.3 2.3 3.1 2.4 1.9
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 70.4 105.7 89.3 79.0 74.0 68.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 37.9 21.5 -7.2 -6.4 -4.0 -3.1
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.1 1.4 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.1
€ 3-month interbank rate (av; %) -0.5 -0.5 0.1 0.9 1.0 1.0
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 8.86 14.75 15.63 16.00 17.00 17.50
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.18 1.10 1.13 1.18 1.22 1.24
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP 11.0 3.0 3.5 3.2 3.1 3.1
Private consumption 15.0 0.0 2.2 2.5 2.4 2.0
Government consumption 2.3 2.6 7.0 3.3 3.0 2.8
Gross domestic investment 6.8 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.5 3.5
Exports of goods & services 24.6 6.0 5.6 6.6 6.6 6.7
Imports of goods & services 2.0 -1.5 5.5 6.5 6.4 5.5
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -4.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 6.2 1.4 3.4 3.0 2.9 2.6
Agriculture -2.2 1.7 3.3 3.3 3.1 3.1
Industry 12.6 5.0 6.1 3.2 3.1 3.1
Services 12.8 2.9 2.3 3.2 3.1 3.1
Turkey outperformed all other G20 economies during the coronavirus pandemic: the country avoided a recession in 2020 and registered an expansion of 11% in 2021. Growth was driven largely by robust export demand and by a credit-fuelled expansion in private consumption, but these two factors are less likely to play a role going forward, and the economic outlook has deteriorated considerably. The inflationary policies pursued by the government have caused a collapse in the lira, but export order books have not improved. Meanwhile, household incomes have been hit by a severe terms-of-trade shock, and consumer confidence has dropped to record-low levels.
A collapse in investor confidence has led to considerable capital outflows: this has heightened funding pressures for Turkish banks, which, in turn, have begun to tighten lending conditions, although interest rates remain sharply negative in real terms. The risks associated with these policies, alongside global monetary tightening and the prospect of weaker export-demand growth, mean that we expect a slowdown in real GDP growth in 2022, to 3%. Uncertainties stemming from Turkey's macroeconomic imbalances, the country's unorthodox economic policies, exchange-rate volatility, geopolitics and the covid-19 situation globally pose downside risks to this forecast. In 2023-26 we forecast average annual growth of 3.2%, which we believe is close to Turkey's medium-term potential.




Enlarge this image.
Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends As in most developing countries, the share of agriculture gross value added in nominal GDP has declined steadily in Turkey in recent decades, but, at 6.5% in 2021, it remains an important sector, especially considering the input it provides to Turkey's food, beverages and tobacco manufacturing industry. In addition, agriculture accounts for a substantial share of goods exports (just under 10% in 2021) and of total employment (about 17%), although almost half of those employed in the sector are classified as unpaid family workers. We expect the share of output of the primary sector to remain broadly stable during the forecast period, but it will remain large compared with most other European countries, at 6.4% of GDP in 2026. The sector would benefit from investment in irrigation in the south-east of the country and in some other regions, but investment is likely to remain on hold in areas affected by the conflict with the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK). More generally, the importance of modern, large-scale agricultural enterprises will spread gradually, but the problems of traditional agriculture and unclear policymaking are likely to persist.
Manufacturing will continue to play a central role in the Turkish economy Industry gross value added, including manufacturing, mining and construction, accounted for 29.2% of GDP in 2021. The collapse in investment and export demand during the 2008-09 global crisis hit the manufacturing and construction sectors hardest. Since then manufacturing, and particularly construction, has re-bounded. In 2021 manufacturing accounted for 22% of GDP, up from about 18% in 2019 before the pandemic. In 2021 industrial production rebounded strongly, growing by 17.7%, driven by the easing of pandemic-related restrictions and the strong recovery of external demand boosted by the weakness of the lira. In 2022-26 we expect growth to slow, reflecting base effects, but we expect the sector to continue to benefit from the increased competitiveness of the lira and "near-shoring" trends in Europe to reduce supply-chain disruption risks that emerged during the pandemic.
Construction was a significant driver of economic growth in 2010-17. In this period real gross value added in the sector, which is dominated by housing construction and mega-infrastructure projects, expanded by an average of about 11% per year, following sharp contractions in the previous two years. The pace of housing construction outstripped demand for several years, even after allowing for strong demographically driven growth in the number of households and the continued replacement of existing buildings. Growth was also bolstered by a strong expansion in credit as a result of pressure by the president on banks to lower mortgage rates; the indirect effect of the credit guarantee fund; the relaxation of macro-prudential measures and ample global international liquidity. Infrastructure and building investments via public-private partnerships, which had picked up significantly over the past five years, also contributed to robust construction growth. However, the boom in activity resulted in a reported 1.5m-2m new homes being unoccupied, a situation that weakened developers' finances and reduced the incentive for new investments. In 2018-21 construction output plunged, given the oversupply of housing, the high ratio of non-performing loans (NPLs) in the sector, the depreciation of the lira against the US dollar, high interest rates and a sharp slowdown in economic growth in 2018-20. By end-2021 real gross value added in construction was 16% below the 2017 peak. Given the increase in macroeconomic instability in recent years, as well as rising input costs in the industry and expected currency volatility, construction output is likely to be volatile, but it could benefit from the government's current low-interest-rate policies.
Growth is likely to slow in several manufacturing subsectors Several manufacturing subsectors, such as automotive, and textiles and clothing, are strongly export-oriented. They suffered from low export growth in 2020, but continued to be an important source of foreign export earnings, and rebounded in 2021 reflecting lira weakness and recovering external demand. However, Turkey's manufactured exports are generally also import intensive. A large portion of the inputs-including energy, intermediates and capital goods-are imported, adding to Turkey's external imbalances, especially when international commodity prices are high or the lira is weak, as it has been since mid-2013. This structural situation is unlikely to change much during the forecast period, as reducing the import intensity of exports and moving up the value-added chain will take time, even though these are explicit goals in the government's investment-incentive system, which was introduced in 2012.
In 2021 vehicle production was 29% below record levels in 2017 The automotive industry tends to be Turkey's biggest export, but after several years of strong growth domestic and external conditions have become more challenging for the sector. In 2021 the total production of Turkey's automotive industry amounted to 1,331,643 vehicles, according to the Automotive Manufacturers Association (OSD)-broadly flat compared with 2020 and about 24% lower than its peak in 2017, reflecting constrained demand both domestically and in important European markets due to the fallout from the currency crisis in Turkey in 2018-19 and the coronavirus pandemic in 2020-21. Exports of vehicles picked up in 2021, but only moderately, to 954,043 (2.6%), and were still 29% below the 2017 level.
Turkey runs a large trade surplus in its automotive sector, and this surplus expanded rapidly in 2016-19, to US$14.1bn, reflecting strong export demand alongside import restrictions and the weak currency. However, according to the Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat), the surplus averaged just US$5.6bn in 2020-21, when earnings from exports of vehicles and parts were about 6.5% below the 2019 level at US$25.3bn, whereas the value of imports rose by just under 45% to US$18.7bn. Conditions are likely to remain challenging in the short and even in the medium term. Global supply-chain disruption caused by another pandemic-related lockdown in China and the outbreak of war in Ukraine will hit production, with some plants in Turkey already warning of production cuts and stoppages in May-June. Although domestic policies affecting credit remain favourable, lira weakness and the erosion of purchasing power by rampant price inflation will negatively affect local demand.
Most vehicle manufacturers will maintain facilities in Turkey Almost 80% of motor vehicles produced in Turkey are exported, and the bulk of these go to the EU (Turkey accounts for almost 30% of vehicles imported by the bloc). As a result, vehicle production will fluctuate in line with demand in Europe, which we expect to be negatively affected by soaring prices and supply-chain bottlenecks. However, the significant depreciation of the lira against the US dollar and the euro is likely to support export volumes over the medium term. Given its location and its trade agreement with the EU, Turkey will remain an important automotive hub, but political uncertainties will weigh on investor confidence. Over the medium term, considering the growth potential of the automotive market in Turkey and the wider region, manufacturers with production plants in Turkey may start to focus more on the Turkish, Middle Eastern and North African markets. The domestic market will be supported by rising incomes and replacement demand. In the domestic market, a total of 772,850 vehicles were sold in 2021, including 561,853 passenger cars. These represented falls of 7.9% and 2.9% respectively, but followed substantial increases of 61.8% and 57.6% in 2020, when sales recovered from three consecutive years of contraction in 2017-19.
We believe that most manufacturers will maintain their production facilities in Turkey. These facilities are technologically advanced, and labour costs are much lower in Turkey than in core European countries, and most central and east European countries, where wages have risen strongly since accession to the EU. However, if Turkey is to remain a major automotive production location in the medium to long term, manufacturers will have to move away from exporting low-end passenger cars, light commercial vehicles and components to north European markets, and towards developing and producing alternative-energy engines and vehicles. There are signs that this transition is already happening. The market will be supported by cuts in taxes on hybrid and electric vehicles.
The textiles and clothing industries remain important The textiles and clothing industries remain important to the Turkish economy. These industries have undergone restructuring under the intense pressure of competition from low-cost producers in Asia, including China, Bangladesh and Pakistan. The government has also been looking at ways to improve investment incentives and target higher value-added products. Both these industries suffered from subdued demand in 2020 amid the global recession. However, over the medium term a more competitive currency and ample growth potential will underpin robust growth prospects. Competitive pressures from lower-cost centres of production will remain a risk, but this could be offset by European supply chains shifting closer to markets.
Reduced security concerns and lira depreciation will drive tourism growth Tourism, one of the most important services sectors of the Turkish economy-an important source of economic activity, employment and foreign exchange-witnessed rapid growth in the past decade, but is highly vulnerable to geopolitical developments and changes in the exchange rate. Istanbul, the largest city, remains the top destination and accounts for a third of all arrivals. It appears that security concerns are no longer deterring visitors from important markets. Tourism came to a complete halt in the second quarter of 2020, and suffered severe losses in the remainder of the year by comparison with the record performance of 2019, reflecting the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on international tourism. Based on TurkStat data, in 2020 annual visitor numbers (including non-resident Turks) plunged by 69.5% to 15.8m and revenue dropped by 65.1% to US$12.1bn.
This decline continued in the first quarter of 2021, but the sector recovered partially in the remainder of the year as travel restrictions were eased. In the year as a whole both visitor numbers and earnings increased twofold, but visitors were still about 40% below 2019 levels and earnings about 30% lower. The recovery continued in the first quarter of 2022, with visitor numbers and earnings returning close to 2019 levels. However, the outbreak of the war in Ukraine in February has clouded the near-term outlook for the sector, given a potential decline in tourist arrivals from Russia and Ukraine, which accounted for more than 27% of all foreign visitors in 2021. Turkey should still benefit from the weakness of the lira, as well as the introduction during the pandemic of a compulsory "safe tourism" certification programme for tourism enterprises, the prioritisation of tourism workers for vaccinations and the exemption of foreign tourists from curfews.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Consumer prices (av) 19.6 50.5 22.2 15.3 14.5 12.8
Consumer prices (year-end) 35.7 38.3 18.4 14.9 13.6 12.4
Average real wages -3.7 -7.0 -1.8 0.6 0.5 -0.7
Unit labour costs -9.3 -15.1 14.0 14.6 9.7 10.1
Labour costs per hour (US$) 3.7 3.1 3.5 4.0 4.3 4.7
Inflation has been elevated in Turkey in recent years, mostly owing to the weakness of the lira against major currencies. However, in the wake of the CBT's mercurial policy management, the lira crashed and inflation accelerated to 61.1% in March 2022. Persistent inflationary expectations, rising global prices, loose monetary policy and a weak lira will keep inflation elevated, at an annual average of 50.5% in 2022. Base effects will cause inflation to ease from the end of 2022, but we still expect it to average about 16% in 2023-26-well above the central bank's 5% target. Renewed monetary policy easing, high currency volatility, supply-side disruptions, and rising global oil and gas prices pose risks to this forecast.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 8.86 14.75 15.63 16.00 17.00 17.50
Exchange rate TL:US$ (end-period) 12.53 15.38 15.88 16.50 17.25 17.50
Exchange rate TL:€ (av) 10.48 16.23 17.62 18.80 20.66 21.70
Real effective exchange-rate index (1997=100; av) 49.8 43.3 48.2 52.0 53.9 57.2
Purchasing power parity TL:US$ (av) 2.71 3.23 3.68 4.07 4.49 4.88
The lira has suffered several severe bouts of volatility in recent years, driven largely by unorthodox policymaking and the politicisation of the CBT. Interest-rate cuts in September-December 2021, despite accelerating inflation and the prospect of global monetary tightening, triggered a sharp fall in the value of the lira in December. Despite a partial recovery in late December and early January 2022 after the introduction of a new government-guaranteed exchange rate-protected deposit account, and substantial deployments of the central bank's reserves, the lira still averaged about TL13.5:US$1 in January-February, compared with TL8.5:US$1 in September 2021. Monetary policy is unlikely to change before the elections in 2023, and we expect further volatility in the short to medium term, as highlighted by the renewed weakness that followed Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February. Steps have been taken to shore up reserves by negotiating foreign-currency swap agreements, increasing reserve requirements on foreign-currency deposits and obliging exporters to sell 40% of their earnings to the central bank; nevertheless, reserves remain low.
Internal and external imbalances, elevated inflation, and a gradual normalisation of monetary policy in the US and the euro area will all contribute to a depreciation of the lira against the US dollar in 2022-26 (albeit not to the extent seen in November-December). Policy unpredictability, poor international relations, foreign investors' concerns about the politicisation of the central bank and a reliance on short-term capital inflows will also weigh on the currency. As a result, we forecast that the lira will continue to follow a depreciatory path in 2022-26, with a high risk of severe volatility.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Current-account balance -14.9 -23.9 -28.4 -28.5 -28.1 -25.9
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -1.8 -3.8 -3.9 -3.5 -3.1 -2.6
Goods: exports fob 224.7 243.5 269.3 300.0 337.4 377.7
Goods: imports fob -253.9 -276.2 -306.5 -342.3 -382.9 -426.6
Trade balance -29.2 -32.7 -37.2 -42.4 -45.5 -48.9
Services: credit 56.8 56.1 62.2 70.6 77.6 86.8
Services: debit -31.6 -32.8 -35.8 -39.5 -42.6 -45.6
Services: balance 25.2 23.3 26.4 31.2 35.0 41.2
Primary income: credit 6.7 7.1 6.4 6.6 6.9 6.4
Primary income: debit -18.5 -22.4 -24.8 -24.9 -25.3 -25.4
Primary income balance -11.8 -15.3 -18.4 -18.2 -18.4 -19.0
Secondary income: credit 4.8 3.9 4.3 4.8 5.2 5.6
Secondary income: debit -3.9 -3.0 -3.4 -3.9 -4.3 -4.8
Secondary income balance 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.8
The current-account deficit narrowed to 1.8% of GDP in 2021, from 5% in 2020, owing to strong merchandise export growth and an increase in the services surplus owing to the partial recovery in tourism. We expect the current-account deficit to widen moderately in 2022-23 owing to higher global energy prices and slower export growth, but it will remain relatively narrow during the forecast period as a whole, as only moderate economic growth curbs the rise in imports. The low-interest policies causing the weakness of the lira may have a limited positive effect on the current account by encouraging exports of goods and services and discouraging imports; however, many imported goods, including energy raw materials, are essential to the economy.
Attracting sufficient capital inflows to cover the deficit and service foreign debt without drawdowns of foreign-exchange reserves will be complicated by uncertainties relating to monetary and foreign policy. The sovereign increasingly relies on domestic financing (with support from the central bank), rather than tapping foreign funding sources. Unorthodox economic policy and frequent bouts of exchange-rate volatility have increased the risk of an eventual foreign-exchange shortage and a balance-of-payments crisis.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Turkey Stocks and flows Foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows rose dramatically in 2005-08, to an annual average of 3% of GDP, after averaging a modest 0.5% of GDP between 1990 and 2004. In the context of the global economic and financial crisis, they slowed again in 2009-10 and have remained below the average level of 3.4% of GDP reached in 2006-08. Inflows of FDI, including sales of real estate to non-residents, declined to about US$13.5bn, or 1.5% of GDP, per year in 2012-14, before picking up to about US$19.3bn, or 2.2% of GDP, in 2015. In 2016-18 FDI inflows fell to an average of US$12.5bn, or 1.5% of GDP. In 2019-20 inflows were subdued, averaging US$8.7bn per year (1.2% of GDP), owing to high economic and policy uncertainty following Turkey's currency crisis in late 2018 and the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic in early 2020. In 2021 FDI inflows picked up to US$13.6bn (or 1.7% of GDP, the highest since 2015) as the global economic recovery gathered pace. The stock of inward FDI stood at just 30% of GDP in 2021 (US$243.3bn)-well below levels in regional competitors such as Romania and Poland (between 40-50% of GDP), and Bulgaria and Slovakia (75-80%). Turkish outward FDI jumped to US$7.1bn in 2014 (from US$3.6bn in 2013), largely reflecting a small number of large transactions, notably the acquisition of the UK-based United Biscuits by Yildiz Holding, a Turkish conglomerate of food manufacturers. The figure eased thereafter, falling to a yearly average of US$3.1bn in 2019-20, presumably owing to high domestic funding needs, before picking up to US$6.4bn in 2021.
Origin and distribution The traditional sources of foreign capital in Turkey have been multinational companies based in major European countries, especially the UK, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Spain and Germany, and in other OECD countries such as the US, Switzerland and Japan. Individual large investments from several smaller EU countries, the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Russia, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and Brazil have amended this pattern in recent years, and there have also been some significant purchases by private-equity funds. A majority of foreign investment appears to go to Istanbul-the commercial capital, where most national Turkish companies have their headquarters. Investment projects of foreign capital companies are overwhelmingly concentrated in the Marmara region (which includes Istanbul), the Aegean region, the Mediterranean and Ankara, the capital. Historically, manufacturing (particularly the chemicals, food and automotive industries) and financial services have attracted the most FDI. In late 2018 BP, a British energy company, and the State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) signed an agreement to form a joint venture to build and operate a petrochemicals plant in Turkey for US$1.8bn (construction is expected to be completed by 2023). Problems in developed economies, and the euro zone crisis in particular, together with the more recent deterioration in economic prospects in Turkey, have led to divestments by foreign financial institutions, many of which entered the Turkish market in 2005-08. As part of a plan to shore up its capital base, the National Bank of Greece has sold its 99.8% stake in Finans Bank, but because the sale, which was completed in mid-2016, was to Qatar National Bank, it did not affect net inward FDI figures in 2016. In 2017 OMV, an Austrian energy group, sold off its 100% stake in Petrol Ofisi, a Turkish petrol retailer. A neutral impact also resulted from the sale of Denizbank by Russia's Sberbank to Emirates NBD, which was completed in July 2019.
Foreign property purchases, which are included in balance-of-payments statistics for FDI, have been making a solid contribution to net inflows since 2005. In 2005-13 net inflows averaged a solid US$2.5bn per year, before picking up to an average of US$4.7bn in 2014-21. Amid excess supply, lira weakness and the deteriorating economic outlook, real estate inflows in US dollar terms declined in 2019-20 but recovered to US$5.6bn in 2021.
Determinants Foreign investment is mostly motivated by the size and potential of the Turkish market, but also increasingly because it offers access to neighbouring markets. The sharp rise in FDI in 2005-07 was partly driven by favourable global financial conditions, which have since evaporated. However, the upsurge was also made possible by the conjunction of several country-specific factors. The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) was more willing than its predecessors to sell majority stakes in state-owned companies to foreigners. The economy was relatively stable and grew strongly, and EU accession talks, which were expected to lead to further reform of the business environment, got under way. The private sector was also more willing to seek foreign partners than in the past. This may have reflected the thinking of a new generation of management, strategies of specialisation in certain sectors, a desire to raise capital for privatisation bids, fear of increasing foreign competition, lost appetite for bank ownership and temptingly high company valuations. From 2008, although the government remained willing to privatise, market conditions deteriorated, resulting in less interest from foreign investors. Since 2013 potential deterrents have multiplied: less buoyant economic growth, mass anti-government protests, financial market volatility, government corruption allegations, the spillover of violence from the conflict in Syria, the collapse of the peace negotiations with the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), an attempted military coup in July 2016 and increased social and political polarisation over the shift to a presidential system of government. Other significant structural deterrents, which vary by the sector, size and type of investment, include regulatory uncertainty, a slow and unpredictable judicial system, weak intellectual property (IP) protection and unfair competition from smuggled goods and the large informal sector. Such determinants are unlikely to change significantly over the forecast period (2022-26), although, in order to attract much-needed FDI inflows, Turkey may start to improve IP protection and clamp down on its large informal sector for tax revenue purposes.
Impact The FDI stock as a percentage of GDP is relatively low when compared with other emerging markets such as Brazil or Russia. However, FDI has accumulated over many decades, and the outlook compared with several central and east European countries has improved. Several leading multinationals, such as Unilever (UK-Netherlands) and Ford (US), have had a long-standing presence in Turkey, and companies with foreign partners play a significant role in the economy, helping to spread modern management and business practice. In the automotive industry, foreign investment has ensured expansion, technology transfer and access to global markets, although some lament the lack of national technology or a national trademark and the focus on production of low-end vehicles. In contrast, much recent FDI has taken the form of acquisitions of existing assets in domestically oriented sectors, and has therefore had a limited direct impact on fixed investment or exports. Foreign ownership of banks has not demonstrably improved either access to international funds or services and productivity, which were already advanced, and nor have fears been realised that foreign-owned banks may attach a greater risk premium than local banks to lending to the Turkish government or Turkish companies. The arrival of Vodafone (UK) has gradually helped to increase competition and investment in telecommunications, where Turkcell and Turk Telekom are dominant players. From a macroeconomic perspective, Turkey has relied on capital inflows, including FDI, to cover its large external financing requirement. In the years prior to the 2008-09 crisis, a growing share of FDI in capital inflows comforted the financial markets by reducing the vulnerability of the lira to trends in short-term capital inflows. This ratio declined in 2020 as FDI inflows dried up, but picked up in 2021, reflecting smaller-albeit still-large-external financing needs.
Potential Our baseline forecast is that, assuming security and policy concerns are addressed during the forecast period, there will be a moderate pick-up driven by further privatisation and other cross-border mergers and acquisitions, as well as foreign interest in residential and commercial property, following the easing of restrictions on foreign ownership of real estate in 2012. Although the surge in foreign acquisitions in telecoms and banking of 2006-07 is unrepeatable, private corporations in many sectors may still be open to foreign investment, and several major assets are yet to be privatised. EIU assumes that the government will make further progress in creating conditions for private-sector investment in infrastructure in order to support economic growth over the longer term. The energy sector in particular has the potential to attract large amounts of foreign investment. Existing investors are likely to increase their investment through further acquisitions or projects, and some greenfield investment may take place. Subdued income growth may dampen foreign investors' earlier interest in retailing, but they may also become more active in other services, such as tourism, as well as in mining and agriculture. Investors from Asia and parts of the Middle East may play a larger role, in addition to Western multinationals and funds.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2016 2021 2026
Population (m)
Total 79.8 85.0 87.1
 Male 39.3 42.0 43.0
 Female 40.5 43.1 44.2
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 25.0 22.9 21.0
 15-64 67.7 68.4 68.6
 65+ 7.3 8.7 10.4
Young-age dependency ratio 0.37 0.33 0.31
Old-age dependency ratio 0.11 0.13 0.15
Working-age population (m) 54.0 58.2 59.8
Urbanisation (% of total) 74.1 76.6 79.2
Labour force (m) 30.4 32.7 35.6
       
Period averages   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth (%)   1.3 0.5
Working-age population growth (%)   1.5 0.5
Labour force growth (%)   1.5 1.7
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   16.4 15.2
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   5.4 5.6
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   20.9 18.4
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   73.9 75.3
 Female   79.9 81.0
 Average   76.9 78.2
Sources: UN population projections, medium variant; International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; EIU estimates and forecasts.
Population growth remains high by European standards Turkey is the third-largest country by population in Europe, after Russia and Germany. Official population figures have been compiled using an address-based registry since 2009. These figures are lower than previous estimates from door-to-door censuses, but are believed to be more reliable. The total population is projected to rise from 85m in 2021 to 87m in 2026, with the female population continuing to outnumber that of males. The total population is expected to grow by 0.5% per year during the forecast period (2022-26), compared with 1.3% during the historical period (2017-21). The pace of population growth has slowed in recent decades, mostly owing to the declining birth rate, which in turn reflects the combined impact on fertility rates of urbanisation, an improvement in the education level of women and wider use of birth control. Nevertheless, population growth remains high by European standards, and the average age remains one of the lowest, at an estimated 33 years in 2021.
Infant mortality will continue to decline, but will be high From an average of 16.4 births per 1,000 inhabitants in 2017-21, the crude birth rate is expected to fall to an average of 15.2 per 1,000 in 2022-26. The infant mortality rate will continue to decline, but will remain high compared with European countries, as the national average is pulled up by the south-eastern and eastern regions, as well as by rural areas. The crude death rate will remain broadly unchanged, at an average of 5.6 per 1,000 population in 2022-26.
Although ageing, the Turkish population is young in a European context and will remain so throughout the forecast period. In 2021 those aged 14 and under comprised an estimated 22.9% of the total population, and the 65-plus age group accounted for just 8.7%. In 2026 the share of under-15s will remain high, at about 21%, and over-65s are expected to account for 10.4% of the population.
Urban population will rise further owing to better conditions in cities The urban population, which is currently estimated at 76.6%, will rise further as rural families, insufficiently supported by agriculture, continue to seek better living standards in towns and cities. The drift from smaller and poorer urban settlements to larger and richer ones will also continue. As a result, all major cities in the west and south (including Ankara, the capital) will continue to grow rapidly. Although earthquake-prone, Istanbul and its surrounding area is likely to become the largest conurbation in Europe-the population was 15.8m at end-2021, up from about 12.6m at end-2007. Other cities and towns to witness particularly strong population growth include prosperous industrial centres like Bursa and Konya, and Antalya, on the Mediterranean coast.
The population of the mostly Kurdish-inhabited south-east, which accounts for about 10% of the total population, has increased steadily, despite strong outward migration. The still-high natural population growth rate in the region will contribute to the rapid expansion of the populations of cities like Gaziantep, Sanliurfa and Diyarbakir. By contrast, the populations of many rural areas in northern, eastern and central Turkey will dwindle. Even some of the larger urban centres in these poorer and more remote regions could lose population as birth rates slow and migration westward and southward continues. Some western and southern areas that are still classed as rural may maintain their populations as a result of intensive agriculture, tourism and/or proximity to major cities. This may also be true of lowland parts of the south-east that benefit from irrigation schemes.
Participation rates will remain well below the OECD average Despite solid growth in the working-age population, Turkey has the lowest labour force participation rate of any OECD country. According to the Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat), it averaged 51.3% in 2021 (70.2% for men and just 32.8% for women), compared with an OECD average of more than 70%. Participation rates in urban areas are lower than in rural areas, reflecting that rural women are typically classified as "unpaid family workers" and are, therefore, counted as workforce participants and employed persons. Low workforce participation rates among urban women probably reflect inadequate job opportunities and the persistence of traditional gender roles. This situation is changing slowly, as illustrated by a gradual rise in recent years in the urban female participation rate. However, the rate is expected to remain low by European standards throughout the forecast period.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Population (m) 85.0 85.6 86.0 86.3 86.7 87.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 807.6 629.7 722.2 824.0 900.4 1000.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 9,497 7,359 8,402 9,547 10,385 11,482
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2,642 2,874 3,067 3,239 3,410 3,589
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 31,062 33,593 35,686 37,522 39,324 41,185
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 470.9 399.4 460.0 537.7 601.3 674.6
Median household income (US$) 13,287 14,444 12,652 14,693 16,333 17,952
Household consumption (US$ bn) 447.6 377.0 430.7 499.2 553.5 615.6
Household consumption per head (US$) 5,260 4,410 5,010 5,780 6,380 7,060
Exports of goods & services (% change) 24.6 6.0 5.6 6.6 6.6 6.7
Imports of goods & services (% change) 2.0 -1.5 5.5 6.5 6.4 5.5
Overall spending power will rise, but income distribution will remain uneven The large consumer market is one of Turkey's chief attractions as a place to do business. The population is young, growing and inclined to consume rather than save, and average incomes are rising steadily in local-currency terms, although since late 2021 lira weakness and rampant inflation have eroded households' spending power. In 2021 GDP per head was US$9,497 at market exchange rates, up from US$8,490 in 2020, and US$31,062 at purchasing power parity (PPP), up from US$27,082 in 2020. At market rates GDP per head in US dollar terms is forecast to decline in 2022, owing to lira weakness and slower economic growth, but EIU expects a gradual recovery from 2023, assuming slower currency depreciation. We expect GDP per head to reach US$41,185 at PPP in 2026. Thereafter, GDP per head in Turkey will remain broadly unchanged, at about 65% of the EU average. Relative to other emerging markets, at PPP rates Turkey's GDP per head is broadly in line with that of Russia, above that of Brazil and China, and below that of Romania.
Income distribution is uneven by European standards. According to the survey of incomes and living conditions by the Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat), the highest-earning 20% of households accounted for 46.7% of total income in 2021 (latest available data), up from 45.9% in 2014; the lowest-earning 20% of households accounted for 6.1%, down from 6.2% in 2014. Geographical factors contributed to the discrepancies. In general, the regions with the highest and most rapidly growing concentrations of population were also the wealthiest regions, except in the south-east, where spending power is low, partly as a result of continued confrontation between the central government and the Kurdish forces. Greater Istanbul, which accounts for about 20% of the population, represents about 25% of household consumption expenditure. By contrast, the statistical region of south-east Anatolia, with about 10% of the population, generated only about 6% of household consumption. Income and consumer expenditure also vary widely between urban and rural areas. These patterns are unlikely to change significantly in the forecast period (2022-26).
The household will remain the main consumption unit. Households typically consist of an average of 3.6 people, and more than 90% of households are made up of married couples. These patterns will change only slowly; the number of households will tend to rise faster than the population, underpinning medium-term demand for housing construction and household durables.
A majority of Turkish consumers aspire to Western-style consumer society A large majority of consumers aspire to "Western style" consumer society, in so far as their incomes permit, although local factors affect lifestyle aspirations. The country has wide variations in geography and climate, which affect diet, leisure activities and demand for certain goods.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 118,447 100,465 112,929 126,510 135,030 144,034
Housing & household fuels 77,574 66,647 76,254 89,030 99,560 111,686
Clothing & footwear 28,696 24,262 27,784 31,752 34,399 37,149
Household goods & services 37,612 32,317 37,348 41,580 44,033 46,534
Health 10,944 9,355 10,722 12,586 14,181 16,055
Transport & communications 77,863 61,031 67,932 80,738 92,104 105,647
Leisure & education 33,899 28,934 33,386 39,203 44,044 49,628
Hotels & restaurants 28,534 24,200 28,125 33,186 37,445 42,386
Other 34,078 29,826 36,187 44,636 52,691 62,517
Total 447,648 377,036 430,666 499,219 553,487 615,636
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 26.5 26.6 26.2 25.3 24.4 23.4
Housing & household fuels 17.3 17.7 17.7 17.8 18.0 18.1
Clothing & footwear 6.4 6.4 6.5 6.4 6.2 6.0
Household goods & services 8.4 8.6 8.7 8.3 8.0 7.6
Health 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.6 2.6
Transport & communications 17.4 16.2 15.8 16.2 16.6 17.2
Leisure & education 7.6 7.7 7.8 7.9 8.0 8.1
Hotels & restaurants 6.4 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.8 6.9
Other 7.6 7.9 8.4 8.9 9.5 10.2
The proportion of total household spending allocated to food, beverages and tobacco is high but expected to fall gradually during the forecast period. Turkish households suffered from slow growth in 2019-20, resulting in a softer labour market and depressing purchasing power in US dollar terms. However, we expect spending by Turkish households, which are dynamic by most European standards, to recover to 2019 levels by 2024 and to grow strongly in 2025-26. The wealthiest households, which enjoy standards of living close to those in western Europe, spend significant amounts on entertainment, education and catering, as well as on transport, because of the high cost of running a car. These households will remain an important target market for environment-friendly and wellness products and services, which are relatively new. Other population segments are starting to provide additional demand for items that have been the prerogative of upper-income groups. Rising car ownership will continue to encourage supermarket shopping, residence in suburban areas and related lifestyle trends. Demand for branded fashion items, fast food, air conditioning and holidays is also spreading. That half of the population is under 35 will encourage the introduction of new products and services in communications, information and entertainment technology. Tourists constitute a significant addition to the consumer market. Assuming that perceived security risk does not increase again in the coming years, we expect the weaker lira to boost arrivals as the risks associated with the coronavirus abate.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2021   2026  
  Turkey Western Europe (av) Turkey Western Europe (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 4.3 11.3 4.2 na
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 408 5,226 479 na
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 19.9 3.2 17.4 3.0
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 2.0 4.0 2.2 na
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 26.5 19.1 23.3 17.5
Meat consumption (kg per person) 39.6 89.6 43.2 95.0
Milk consumption (litres per person) 219.0 261.0 230.0 276.0
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 3.4 6.2 3.5 6.6
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 185 552 196 na
Telephone main lines 143 415 136 –
Mobile phone subscribers 98 121 100 na
Television sets 536 837 609 939
Personal computers 488 843 350 –
Households
No. of households (m) 23,740.0 193,040.0 24,850.0 200,910.0
No. of people per household (av) 3.6 2.2 3.5 2.1
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 14,440 52,980 19,810 62,770
Average monthly wage (US$) 823 4,160 1,330 na
Gini index 41.9 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); EIU estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population 0.53 0.43 0.46
Working-age population 0.43 0.09 0.20
Working-age minus total population -0.09 -0.33 -0.26
Labour force 1.09 0.18 0.46
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 2.7 2.0 2.2
Growth of real GDP 3.2 2.5 2.7
Labour productivity growth 1.9 2.3 2.2
Growth of capital stock 3.9 2.9 3.2
Total factor productivity growth 1.4 1.3 1.4
Initial conditions: Some of the obstacles to solid and stable growth were removed in the decade to 2010, but in recent years the government has pursued unorthodox policies, and focused on domestic power struggles and the foreign policy challenges arising from turmoil in the wider region. This has put economic reforms designed to boost investment and employment on hold. Given the deterioration of Turkey's institutions of governance and the likelihood that the current domestic political tensions will continue for some time, EIU expects only limited progress on reforms in the near term, damaging Turkey's longer-term growth potential. For similar reasons, we do not expect Turkey's EU membership bid to make significant progress, making accession a remote prospect. A relatively low level of skills and quality of the workforce compared with Turkey's main competitors for foreign direct investment (FDI) in central and eastern Europe will continue to act as a deterrent to FDI, although Turkey will enjoy substantially more favourable demographics for much of the long-term forecast period (2022-50).
Working-age population growth will turn negative in 2040 Demographic trends: On current projections, Turkey will have the second-largest national population in Europe (after Russia) by 2050, and, unlike in most European economies, the working-age population will continue to grow until the early 2040s. However, it will shrink thereafter as the country's demographic dynamic starts to deteriorate from about 2030. In 2021-30 the difference between growth in the working-age population and that of the total population will be close to zero, before turning negative in 2031-50, which will dampen economic growth. This trend could be delayed if the bulk of the 3.6m Syrian refugees currently being hosted in Turkey are integrated into the population, but anti-immigrant sentiment has increased, and the current government is hoping to persuade at least 1m refugees to return to Syria in the near future. Throughout the long-term forecast period, we expect an upward trend in the labour force and employment as a result of rises in participation rates, given the low starting levels. With the workforce continuing to expand at a steady rate, it will be a challenge to produce sufficient jobs to lower the unemployment rate.
External conditions: International developments-particularly in international financial markets, the EU (Turkey's main export market) and in global terms of trade-will continue to affect the country's long-term economic performance. The coronavirus pandemic and the Ukraine crisis may result in increased risk aversion among investors over the long term, boding ill for Turkey, which relies heavily on attracting capital inflows to support growth. We expect export-led industries to play an increasing role in growth. Turkey would benefit from greater global trade liberalisation, but the process of liberalisation is faltering, and trade flows have slowed. Over the long term Turkey may benefit from "near-shoring" trends, as the pandemic has demonstrated that overly complex supply-chains can negatively affect growth. As a supplier of the developed economies, Turkey will face intense global competition, as low and medium value-added manufactured goods are likely to remain its main product lines. Its technology potential is relatively limited, and the country is not well placed to become a major supplier of services other than tourism and, to a lesser extent, construction, although improvements in (and diversification of) the domestic financial sector over the past decade may enable Turkey to develop as a provider of banking and insurance services in the wider region. Owing to completed and planned pipeline construction, Turkey has been developing into a major energy hub between Russia, the Caspian region and western Europe. However, the need to drastically reduce global consumption of fossil fuels, tensions with Greece and Cyprus over gas exploration in disputed waters in the eastern Mediterranean, and the introduction of severe financial and economic sanctions against Russia in the wake of its invasion of Ukraine have clouded the outlook. Turkey is itself heavily dependent on imported oil and gas from Russia, and much greater investment and co-operation with the EU would be needed if Turkey were to become a real alternative to Russian supplies. As Turkey shares borders with countries such as Iran, Syria and Iraq, its immediate regional environment is challenging, in particular from a security perspective.
Problems in the EU will dampen Turkey's interest in membership We do not expect Turkey to join the EU in our long-term forecast period, and there is a high probability that the accession negotiations may even be abandoned by one or both sides in this period. Given the limited progress so far in its accession talks, the strength of public opposition in most EU member states to Turkish membership, and the economic and political challenges still facing the EU, we believe that Turkey's commitment to the goal of full EU membership will diminish even further. This increases the risk that government commitment to political and economic reform will weaken further. Harmonisation of Turkey's domestic legislation with EU norms is significantly more important for Turkey's long-term economic stability than actual member-ship. If the EU were to loosen its structure-the UK's departure from the bloc could prompt such a move-opposition within the EU to Turkish accession might ease, increasing Turkey's chances of joining. However, this is not our core forecast.
Institutions and policy trends: Recep Tayyip Erdogan's victory in Turkey's first direct presidential election in August 2014, followed by the transition from a parliamentary system of government to an executive presidency and his re-election in 2018, has major implications for the country's future institutional and policy-setting framework. The constitution currently allows Mr Erdogan to run for president for one more five-year term (2023-28). However, discussions have begun on a new constitution, to be enacted in 2022, that could include processes to allow him to stay in power beyond 2028 if he is re-elected in 2023. The issue of Mr Erdogan's succession as leader of the Justice and Development Party (AKP) and president of the country could also become a source of instability during the long-term forecast period.
There is considerable risk that economic policy will be increasingly political Economic policy will continue to be tailored to political purposes rather than to maintaining macroeconomic stability and further improvement of the business environment. Nevertheless, Turkey's public finances are structurally sounder following a decade of IMF-backed reforms in 1999-2008, which may allow the government more room to increase public investment in infrastructure and possibly to reduce tax rates. Given the little progress that we expect to be made in Turkey's EU accession negotiations, the problems of unpredictability and inefficiency in the country's legal and regulatory environment are expected to continue beyond 2026. Mr Erdogan's assertive approach to foreign relations is likely to limit the influence of international bodies, such as the IMF, the World Bank, the Council of Europe and the European Court of Human Rights, over the direction of policy.
The government's peace negotiations with the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) collapsed following the June 2015 election, and neither the PKK nor Mr Erdogan have shown any indication that they are willing to revive them any time soon. If the situation continues on its current trajectory, there is a real risk that the PKK and its affiliates will spread the conflict from the predominantly Kurdish-inhabited south-east of the country to Turkey's main cities in central and western regions, where the Kurdish population has grown rapidly in recent years. The mounting death toll would probably encourage Mr Erdogan to resort to increasingly authoritarian means to retain control.
Long-term performance: Turkey's economic growth performance is expected to exceed that of other emerging markets such as Brazil and Russia (but to be broadly on a par with that of China) as a result of its more favourable demographic profile, alongside large increases in productivity. However, at a forecast average of 2.7% a year in 2022-50, real GDP growth will be well below the average growth of 4.8% per year recorded in 2000-20. Average growth in GDP per head will be substantially lower, reflecting the expected rise in the total population. Income levels will remain well below the EU27 average, but some catch-up is likely. Improvements in the policy environment could produce sub-stantially better results, but the changes in the political environment have created significant downside risks to the implementation of the necessary reforms.
Income and market size
  2021 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 85.0 89.2 97.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 807.6 1,303.9 3,818.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 9,500 14,620 39,310
Private consumption (US$ bn) 447.6 856.1 2,494.1
Private consumption per head (US$) 5,260 9,600 25,680
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2,641.6 4,428.3 10,726.3
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 31,060 49,670 110,420
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 284.8 535.6 986.5
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 290.0 589.6 1,126.3
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 45.0 50.8 59.4
Share of world population (%) 1.1 1.1 1.0
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.9 0.9 1.0
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.0 0.0 0.0
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 1.0 1.2 0.8
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability Global land and ocean temperatures have been rising rapidly since the 1980s, a trend that is widely attributed to growing greenhouse gas emissions from expanding human activity and population. This rise in average temperatures implies a higher number of extremely hot days in the summer period, as well as higher minimum temperatures that will lead to greater electricity consumption and a heavier burden on health services due to temperature-related illnesses and parasitic diseases that thrive in warmer climates.
Precipitation in the eastern Mediterranean has been declining steadily over the past decades and is expected to continue to fall, raising the probability of extremely dry spells of weather. In 1998-2012 the eastern Mediterranean Levant (Cyprus, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine, Syria and Turkey) experienced the worst drought in 900 years. In Turkey, in 2007 this resulted in water restrictions being imposed in the capital, Ankara, with some residents losing access for up to ten days. It also resulted in Turkey's agricultural output contracting by nearly 7% year on year and the government having to provide grants to affected farmers to compensate for the losses. In the future limited average rainfall is likely to be accompanied by torrential precipitation, such as in 2018-19, with devastating consequences for infrastructure and agricultural output.
The Turkish government has recently taken some steps to mitigate the weakness posed by the country's geographical location. In 2010 the government established a national climate change strategy that included improved disaster mitigation plans and improved efficiency in water management. Specifically, a substantial number of dams have been built, and efforts have been made to improve some of the highly inefficient irrigation and water supply systems. Although such measures may help to mitigate the effects of climate change, they may also create foreign policy challenges. The construction of several dams along the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers, which feed water into Iraq and Syria, has the potential to increase significantly tensions with these neighbouring countries. In 2019 EIU developed a model to calculate the impact of climate change on long-term growth, and we expect that, despite mitigation efforts, Turkey's real GDP will be 2.8% smaller by 2050 than it would have otherwise been.
Technological development The integration of advanced technologies in Turkey's economy is proceeding at a fast pace, but from a relatively low base. E-commerce, computer ownership and internet access have increased rapidly in the past decade. Yet, despite this progress, Turkey remains far behind the technological frontier. In EIU's business environment rankings, Turkey ranks 42nd in the global ranking for technological readiness. According to the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report 2019, Turkey ranks 61st overall, but 69th in terms of information and communications technology (ICT) adoption, which includes criteria such as the percentage of internet users. The country ranks just 64th in internet usage and 59th in fixed-broadband technologies.
Across sectors, large, export-oriented private-sector firms tend to be the most technologically intensive. Firms in the automotive sector, usually structured as joint partnerships between Turkish conglomerates and major global auto producers, are a major driver of research and development (R&D) expenditure. Ford Otosan, the joint venture of Ford (US) in Turkey, has become a global hub for the carmaker's commercial vehicle development and output. In 2015 the company opened a US$25m R&D unit-Turkey's largest, employing about 1,500 engineers. Oyak-Renault, a joint venture between Renault (France) and Oyak, the Turkish armed forces pension fund, won government financial support worth US$100m to support hybrid investments at its Bursa plant.
Turkey's technological prospects are unclear. The country has a young, dynamic labour pool, but its education system is inadequate at providing the skills demanded by employers. In fact, this is regularly one of businesses' top complaints. In addition, in recent years many of Turkey's most educated young people have emigrated abroad, which will make attracting top foreign talent and further foreign direct investment (FDI) more difficult.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 3.2 3.0 2.3 -3.7 5.7 3.3 3.1 2.8 2.6 2.6
EU27 GDP growth 2.9 2.1 1.8 -6.1 5.3 2.9 2.4 2.1 1.9 1.9
Western Europe growth 2.9 1.9 1.5 -6.0 5.9 3.0 2.3 2.0 1.9 1.9
World trade growth 5.6 3.8 0.3 -4.9 10.5 4.9 4.7 4.0 3.6 3.6
US CPI 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.7 7.2 2.8 2.1 2.1 2.1
EU27 CPI 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.8 6.3 2.5 2.0 1.9 1.9
Manufactures export price 2.0 5.1 -1.4 0.8 5.9 1.3 2.3 3.1 2.4 1.9
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 70.4 105.7 89.3 79.0 74.0 68.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 0.1 0.9 1.0 1.0
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.13 1.18 1.22 1.24
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 133.0 140.8 146.8 145.1 146.0
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Expenditure on GDP (TL bn at current market prices)
GDP 3,122 3,748 4,308 5,019 7,154 9,288 11,285 13,185 15,308 17,510
Private consumption 1,831 2,107 2,449 2,850 3,965 5,561 6,729 7,988 9,409 10,774
Government consumption 449 550 668 764 940 1,447 1,864 2,182 2,529 2,882
Gross fixed investment 933 1,115 1,118 1,373 2,000 2,387 2,701 3,053 3,444 3,886
Exports of goods & services 814 1,159 1,404 1,436 2,523 4,358 5,240 6,078 7,262 8,421
Imports of goods & services 930 1,180 1,295 1,637 2,569 4,450 5,234 6,101 7,322 8,437
Stockbuilding 26 -3 -36 232 295 -15 -15 -15 -15 -15
Domestic demand 3,239 3,769 4,198 5,219 7,200 9,381 11,279 13,207 15,368 17,527
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 855.9 776.2 759.2 716.1 807.6 629.7 722.2 824.0 900.4 1,000.6
Private consumption 501.8 436.4 431.6 406.7 447.6 377.0 430.7 499.2 553.5 615.6
Government consumption 123.1 113.9 117.7 109.1 106.2 98.1 119.3 136.4 148.8 164.7
Gross fixed investment 255.7 231.0 197.0 195.9 225.8 161.8 172.9 190.8 202.6 222.0
Exports of goods & services 223.1 240.0 247.5 204.9 284.8 295.4 335.4 379.9 427.2 481.2
Imports of goods & services 255.0 244.5 228.2 233.6 290.0 301.7 335.0 381.3 430.7 482.1
Stockbuilding 7.2 -0.6 -6.3 33.0 33.3 -1.0 -1.0 -0.9 -0.9 -0.9
Domestic demand 887.7 780.7 739.9 744.7 812.8 636.0 721.8 825.5 904.0 1,001.5
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 58.6 56.2 56.8 56.8 55.4 59.9 59.6 60.6 61.5 61.5
Government consumption 14.4 14.7 15.5 15.2 13.1 15.6 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5
Gross fixed investment 29.9 29.8 25.9 27.4 28.0 25.7 23.9 23.2 22.5 22.2
Stockbuilding 0.8 -0.1 -0.8 4.6 4.1 -0.2 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1
Exports of goods & services 26.1 30.9 32.6 28.6 35.3 46.9 46.4 46.1 47.4 48.1
Imports of goods & services 29.8 31.5 30.1 32.6 35.9 47.9 46.4 46.3 47.8 48.2
Memorandum item
National savings ratio (%) 30.7 29.7 25.1 32.0 32.1 25.5 23.8 23.0 22.4 22.1
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Real expenditure on GDP (TL bn at constant 2009 prices)
GDP 1,703.2 1,757.8 1,769.8 1,799.4 1,998.0 2,058.8 2,131.0 2,199.4 2,267.9 2,338.0
Private consumption 1,019.0 1,027.2 1,040.7 1,072.9 1,233.5 1,233.5 1,260.3 1,291.4 1,322.4 1,348.8
Government consumption 230.1 245.3 255.7 260.9 266.9 273.8 293.0 302.7 311.8 320.5
Gross fixed investment 502.9 503.7 439.1 469.0 501.0 520.1 539.8 559.8 579.4 599.7
Exports of goods & services 395.8 429.4 449.9 384.3 478.7 507.6 535.9 571.1 608.6 649.6
Imports of goods & services 413.1 391.2 365.2 394.4 402.4 396.5 418.3 445.6 474.3 500.6
Stockbuilding -31.57 -56.57 -50.32 6.62 -79.80 -79.80 -79.80 -80.00 -80.00 -80.00
Domestic demand 1,720.5 1,719.6 1,685.1 1,809.4 1,921.6 1,947.6 2,013.3 2,073.9 2,133.6 2,189.0
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 7.4 3.2 0.7 1.7 11.0 3.0 3.5 3.2 3.1 3.1
Private consumption 5.9 0.8 1.3 3.1 15.0 0.0 2.2 2.5 2.4 2.0
Government consumption 5.2 6.6 4.2 2.1 2.3 2.6 7.0 3.3 3.0 2.8
Gross fixed investment 8.1 0.2 -12.8 6.8 6.8 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.5 3.5
Exports of goods & services 12.4 8.5 4.8 -14.6 24.6 6.0 5.6 6.6 6.6 6.7
Imports of goods & services 10.3 -5.3 -6.7 8.0 2.0 -1.5 5.5 6.5 6.4 5.5
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.4 -1.5 0.4 3.2 -4.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 7.0 -0.1 -2.0 7.4 6.2 1.4 3.4 3.0 2.9 2.6
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 3.6 0.5 0.8 1.8 8.9 0.0 1.3 1.5 1.4 1.2
Government consumption 0.7 0.9 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.9 0.5 0.4 0.4
Gross fixed investment 2.4 0.0 -3.7 1.7 1.8 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.9
External balance 0.3 3.3 2.7 -5.4 4.8 1.7 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.6
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Origin of GDP (TL bn at constant 2009 prices)
GDP at factor cost 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.8 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1
Agriculture 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Industry 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6
Services 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.3
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 4.9 2.1 3.3 5.9 -2.2 1.7 3.3 3.3 3.1 3.1
Industry 9.5 0.5 -2.9 0.8 12.6 5.0 6.1 3.2 3.1 3.1
Services 7.5 4.9 2.7 0.5 12.8 2.9 2.3 3.2 3.1 3.1
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 7.0 7.0 7.1 7.5 6.5 6.4 6.4 6.4 6.4 6.4
Industry 31.1 30.3 29.1 29.1 29.2 29.8 30.5 30.5 30.5 30.5
Services 62.0 62.9 64.0 63.9 64.1 64.0 63.3 63.3 63.2 63.2
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) 8.7 1.6 -0.7 1.7 17.7 2.3 2.5 2.5 2.3 2.0
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 3.8 1.0 3.0 6.8 2.8 0.8 1.5 1.0 0.8 1.1
Total factor productivity growth 1.8 0.4 2.1 3.2 4.3 0.1 1.7 1.3 1.2 1.4
Growth of capital stock 7.4 6.8 4.3 4.6 4.4 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.1 4.0
Growth of potential GDP 6.7 4.2 4.2 1.3 10.1 3.1 3.9 3.8 4.0 3.6
Growth of real GDP 7.4 c 3.2 c 0.7 c 1.7 c 11.0 c 3.0 3.5 3.2 3.1 3.1
Growth of real GDP per head 5.7 c 1.7 c -0.6 c 0.6 c 10.1 2.4 3.0 2.8 2.6 2.6
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 81.1 82.3 83.4 84.3 85.0 85.6 86.0 86.3 86.7 87.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 855.9 776.2 759.2 716.1 807.6 629.7 722.2 824.0 900.4 1,000.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 10,550 9,430 9,100 8,490 9,500 7,360 8,400 9,550 10,390 11,480
Private consumption (US$ bn) 501.8 436.4 431.6 406.7 447.6 a 377.0 430.7 499.2 553.5 615.6
Private consumption per head (US$) 6,190 5,300 5,170 4,820 5,260 4,410 5,010 5,780 6,380 7,060
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2256.1 2295.7 2236.2 2284.0 2641.6 2874.3 3067.4 3238.7 3409.6 3588.9
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 27,810 27,880 26,800 27,080 31,060 33,590 35,690 37,520 39,320 41,180
Personal disposable income (TL bn) 1,917.5 b 2,206.9 b 2,564.7 b 2,998.0 b 4,171.1 5,891.7 7,187.8 8,603.9 10,221.4 11,805.7
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 525.6 b 457.1 b 452.0 b 427.8 b 470.9 399.4 460.0 537.7 601.3 674.6
Growth of real disposable income (%) 5.9 b 0.8 b 1.3 b 3.5 b 15.0 0.7 3.0 3.3 3.3 2.9
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 1.08 1.09 1.09 1.10 1.10 1.09 1.10 1.10 1.11 1.08
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.91 0.88 0.85 0.86 b 0.64 c 0.69 0.74 0.77 0.82 0.83
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 1.80 1.68 1.74 1.84 b 1.85 c 1.86 1.85 1.85 1.88 1.89
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.98 0.94 0.99 0.99 1.04 a 1.03 1.10 1.18 1.26 1.40
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 21.7 22.2 23.2 24.0 22.4 21.4 22.1 21.8 21.9 21.5
Interest 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.7 2.5 2.8 3.6 3.9 3.7 3.3
Non-interest 19.9 20.2 20.9 21.3 19.8 18.6 18.5 17.9 18.2 18.3
Government revenue 20.2 20.2 20.3 20.5 19.7 17.8 17.9 18.5 18.7 18.8
Budget balance -1.5 -1.9 -2.9 -3.5 -2.7 -3.7 -4.2 -3.4 -3.1 -2.7
Primary balance 0.3 0.0 -0.6 -0.8 -0.2 -0.9 -0.6 0.5 0.5 0.6
Government debt 28.0 30.2 32.7 39.9 42.3 43.2 43.8 42.6 41.1 39.7
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 3.65 4.83 5.67 7.01 8.86 c 14.75 15.63 16.00 17.00 17.50
Exchange rate TL:US$ (year-end) 3.78 5.27 5.95 7.35 12.53 c 15.38 15.88 16.50 17.25 17.50
Exchange rate TL:€ (av) 4.12 5.70 6.35 8.00 10.48 16.23 17.62 18.80 20.66 21.70
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.10 1.13 1.18 1.22 1.24
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 73.9 c 63.4 c 61.7 c 55.4 c 49.8 c 43.3 48.2 52.0 53.9 57.2
Purchasing power parity TL:US$ (av) 1.38 1.63 1.93 2.20 2.71 c 3.23 3.68 4.07 4.49 4.88
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 15.7 19.1 26.1 36.0 53.6 47.7 31.9 22.2 22.2 21.2
Domestic credit growth (%) 19.0 17.6 16.2 38.4 37.1 30.9 31.2 22.2 22.2 21.2
Lending rate (av; %) 15.7 23.7 20.4 12.9 20.9 24.3 25.5 20.5 16.0 14.5
Deposit rate (av; %) 12.4 18.1 18.8 10.8 18.2 19.6 19.6 16.5 10.5 9.0
3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 12.8 19.8 20.7 11.2 18.7 16.4 17.3 17.5 15.8 13.8
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 31.5 32.2 32.5 30.7 32.7 33.5 33.9 34.4 35.1 35.6
Labour force (% change) 3.5 2.2 0.9 -5.5 6.6 2.3 1.1 1.6 2.1 1.3
Employment (m) 28.1 28.7 28.0 26.7 28.8 29.5 30.1 30.7 31.4 32.1
Employment (% change) 3.5 2.2 -2.3 -4.8 8.0 2.3 2.0 2.2 2.3 2.0
Unemployment (m) 3.4 3.5 4.5 4.0 3.9 4.0 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.5
Unemployment rate (%) 10.9 10.9 13.8 13.2 12.0 12.0 11.2 10.7 10.6 10.0
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
Consumer prices (av) 11.2 16.4 15.2 12.3 19.6 50.5 22.2 15.3 14.5 12.8
Consumer prices (year-end) 11.7 20.0 11.5 14.3 35.7 38.3 18.4 14.9 13.6 12.4
Producer prices (av) 15.8 27.1 17.6 12.2 43.9 87.2 26.7 21.9 14.7 10.3
GDP deflator (av) 10.9 16.3 14.2 14.6 28.4 26.0 17.4 13.2 12.6 11.0
Private consumption deflator (av) 11.1 14.2 14.7 12.9 21.0 40.3 18.4 15.8 15.0 12.3
Government consumption deflator (av) 10.7 14.8 16.6 12.2 20.3 50.0 20.3 13.3 12.5 10.9
Fixed investment deflator (av) 13.1 19.4 14.9 15.0 36.3 15.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0
Average nominal wages 13.2 c 14.6 c 21.0 c 14.0 c 15.2 c 40.0 20.0 16.0 15.0 12.0
Average real wages 1.8 c -1.5 c 5.0 c 1.5 c -3.7 c -7.0 -1.8 0.6 0.5 -0.7
Unit labour costs (TL-based; av) d 11.6 c 16.0 c 20.0 c 9.2 c 14.6 c 41.4 20.7 17.4 16.6 13.3
Unit labour costs (US$-based) d -7.6 c -12.4 c 2.1 c -11.6 c -9.3 c -15.1 14.0 14.6 9.7 10.1
Labour costs per hour (TL) d 17.9 c 20.5 c 24.8 c 28.2 c 32.5 c 45.5 54.6 63.3 72.9 81.6
Labour costs per hour (US$) 4.9 c 4.2 c 4.4 c 4.0 c 3.7 c 3.1 3.5 4.0 4.3 4.7
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates. d Manufacturing only: public and private sectors.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -40.9 -21.7 5.3 -35.5 -14.9 -23.9 -28.4 -28.5 -28.1 -25.9
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.8 -2.8 0.7 -5.0 -1.8 -3.8 -3.9 -3.5 -3.1 -2.6
Goods: exports fob 169.2 178.9 182.2 168.4 224.7 243.5 269.3 300.0 337.4 377.7
Goods: imports fob -227.8 -219.6 -199.0 -206.3 -253.9 -276.2 -306.5 -342.3 -382.9 -426.6
Trade balance -58.6 -40.7 -16.8 -37.9 -29.2 -32.7 -37.2 -42.4 -45.5 -48.9
Services: credit 53.5 58.6 62.7 35.4 56.8 56.1 62.2 70.6 77.6 86.8
Services: debit -27.1 -28.5 -28.7 -23.9 -31.6 -32.8 -35.8 -39.5 -42.6 -45.6
Services balance 26.3 30.2 34.1 11.5 25.2 23.3 26.4 31.2 35.0 41.2
Primary income: credit 5.0 6.1 6.3 6.2 6.7 7.1 6.4 6.6 6.9 6.4
Primary income: debit -16.1 -18.1 -19.2 -15.6 -18.5 -22.4 -24.8 -24.9 -25.3 -25.4
Primary income balance -11.2 -11.9 -12.8 -9.4 -11.8 -15.3 -18.4 -18.2 -18.4 -19.0
Secondary income: credit 4.5 2.8 2.7 4.1 4.8 3.9 4.3 4.8 5.2 5.6
Secondary income: debit -2.0 -2.0 -1.9 -3.9 -3.9 -3.0 -3.4 -3.9 -4.3 -4.8
Secondary income balance 2.5 0.8 0.8 0.2 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.8
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 91.8 c 94.3 90.3 89.0 107.3 c 108.4 112.8 116.9 122.3 127.0
Export prices (% change) 1.8 c 2.8 -4.3 -1.4 20.6 c 1.0 4.1 3.6 4.6 3.9
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 87.8 c 93.7 89.9 84.3 101.0 c 109.2 113.0 119.7 126.7 133.6
Import prices (% change) 7.4 c 6.7 -4.1 -6.2 19.8 c 8.2 3.5 5.9 5.9 5.5
Terms of trade (2010=100) 104.5 c 100.7 100.4 105.6 106.3 c 99.2 99.8 97.7 96.5 95.1
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 7.6 c 4.0 c 1.5 c -7.2 c 9.9 c 5.0 5.4 3.9 3.4 3.3
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ m)
Inward direct investment 11,190 12,505 9,573 7,831 13,641 10,000 9,356 11,067 12,035 12,987
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 1.3 1.6 1.3 1.1 1.7 1.6 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 4.4 5.4 4.9 4.0 6.0 6.2 5.4 5.8 5.9 5.8
Outward direct investment -2,703 -3,590 -2,945 -3,239 -6,449 -4,000 -2,890 -3,000 -3,145 -3,096
Net foreign direct investment 8,487 8,915 6,628 4,592 7,192 6,000 6,466 8,067 8,890 9,891
Stock of foreign direct investment 198,003 146,495 162,120 229,652 243,293 253,293 262,649 273,716 285,751 298,738
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 2,441 1,779 1,943 2,723 2,861 2,960 3,056 3,171 3,296 3,428
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 23.1 18.9 21.4 32.1 30.1 40.2 36.4 33.2 31.7 29.9
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.55 3.18 0.92 0.77 1.21 0.81 0.72 0.82 0.86 0.89
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.66 0.46 0.47 0.69 0.66 c 0.62 0.62 0.62 0.62 0.62
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 456.6 446.0 440.8 435.9 443.5 431.6 450.5 468.5 491.4 511.1
Total external debt (% of GDP) 53.3 57.5 58.1 60.9 54.9 68.5 62.4 56.9 54.6 51.1
Debt/exports ratio (%) 152.6 144.2 133.0 162.5 115.0 104.1 98.8 92.1 86.2 79.9
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 37.9 34.4 34.5 41.3 27.0 24.4 22.4 21.5 19.3 18.2
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU
Global data Global data
OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
Domestic data GDP growth and components: TurkStat
Population: UN Population database and EIU interpolation
Consumer prices: IMF, IFS; TurkStat
Industrial production: derived from OECD, Main Economic Indicators
Exchange rates and interest rates: IMF, IFS
External trade and balance of payments: IMF, IFS; Central Bank of Turkey; TurkStat
Central government financial balance: IMF, IFS; Turkish Treasury
Foreign direct investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report; Central Bank of Turkey
Abbreviations IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
TurkStat: Turkish Statistical Institute
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows the EIU to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by the EIU for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2017-21) and from EIU assessments for the forecast period (2022-26). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by the EIU for 2017-21. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2022-26 are based on EIU assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; the EIU, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2017-21 ranges are then used to derive 2022-26 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2022-26, not to the likely situation in 2026 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2019 or 2024). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2017-21   2022-26  
  Turkey Regional average a Turkey Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 3 4.6 3 4.4
  2. Risk of social unrest 2 4.1 1 3.8
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 2 4.8 2 4.8
  4. Government and opposition 2 4.2 2 4.0
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 3 4.1 3 4.0
  6. International disputes or tensions 3 3.9 1 2.9
  7. Government policy towards business 3 3.9 2 3.7
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 3 3.6 2 3.5
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 3 3.7 3 3.9
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 2 3.9 2 4.1
 11. Efficiency of legal system 2 3.8 2 3.9
 12. Corruption 2 3.9 2 4.0
 13. Impact of crime 3 4.2 3 4.2
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 3 4.9 3 4.9
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 4 3.8 3 3.9
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 5 2.8 5 2.8
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 1 4.5 1 3.8
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 3 4.4 3 4.3
  6. Quality of policymaking 2 3.7 1 4.1
  7. Institutional underpinnings 3 4.6 2 4.7
  8. Asset prices 2 2.3 2 2.7
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 5 4.0 5 4.2
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 4 4.9 5 5.0
  3. Real GDP growth* 4 1.9 3 2.9
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 4 3.7 4 3.7
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 3 1.8 3 2.3
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 2 1.8 3 2.4
  7. The natural resource endowment* 3 3.3 3 3.3
  8. Profitability* 5 2.2 3 3.1
  9. Regional integration 4 4.8 4 4.7
 10. Proximity to markets 3 4.7 3 4.2
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 4 4.7 4 4.8
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 4 3.8 4 4.0
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 3 3.9 3 4.0
  4. Promotion of competition 3 3.7 3 3.7
  5. Protection of intellectual property 3 4.5 3 4.6
  6. Price controls 4 4.1 4 4.0
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 2 3.3 2 3.4
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 3 3.7 3 3.6
  9. Minority shareholders 3 4.2 3 4.2
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 4 4.2 4 3.4
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 3 3.8 2 3.8
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 4 4.8 4 4.9
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 3 4.6 3 4.6
  5. Government favouritism 3 3.9 3 3.3
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 4 4.8 4 4.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 4 4.4 4 4.2
  3. Ease of trading* 4 4.6 4 4.1
  4. Openness of trade* 4 4.5 5 4.6
  5. Restrictions on the current account 5 4.9 5 5.0
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 5 4.3 5 4.6
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 4 2.7 4 2.9
  3. Value-added tax* 3 2.4 3 2.3
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 3 2.8 3 2.8
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 3 3.6 3 3.8
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 3 3.8 3 3.8
  7. Tax complexity 2 3.4 2 3.3
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 4 2.9 3 3.4
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 3 4.5 3 4.6
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 4 3.2 3 3.7
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 3 4.4 3 4.2
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 4 4.3 4 4.6
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 4 3.4 4 3.8
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 5 2.6 5 2.7
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 3 4.5 3 4.5
  3. Quality of workforce* 3 3.9 3 3.9
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 3 4.3 3 4.4
  5. Health of the workforce* 4 4.9 5 5.0
  6. Level of technical skills 3 4.2 3 4.1
  7. Cost of living* 5 3.1 5 3.3
  8. Incidence of strikes* 5 3.7 5 3.8
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 2 3.2 2 3.4
 10. Extent of wage regulation 3 3.4 3 3.3
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 3 3.8 3 3.7
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 3 4.2 4 4.6
  2. Broadband connection speed* 1 4.6 3 4.6
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 3 4.3 3 4.4
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 4 4.6 4 4.6
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 2 3.8 2 3.8
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 3 4.2 3 4.2
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 4 4.4 5 4.6
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 2 4.2 2 4.4
  9. Rents of office space* 2 1.7 3 1.6
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 4 4.4 4 4.2
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 4 4.7 4 4.8
  3. Scope of e-government* 3 4.3 3 4.6
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 5 4.5 5 4.1
  5. Internet use* 3 4.7 5 4.9
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 1 2.7 1 2.3
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 4 4.3 4 4.6
  8. Research infrastructure* 4 4.4 3 4.3
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

Subject: Tax rates; Foreign exchange rates; Coups d'etat; Politics; Pandemics; Productivity; Consumption; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Presidents; Population growth; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Inflation; Economic growth

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Foreign exchange rates Productivity Consumption International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Inflation Economic growth; Industry: 92111 :‎ Executive Offices

Location: Turkey; Middle East

People: Erdogan, Recep Tayyip

Company / organization: Name: Justice & Development Party-Turkey; NAICS: 813940; Name: North Atlantic Treaty Organization--NATO; NAICS: 928120

Classification: 92111: Executive Offices

Identifier / keyword: Turkey; Middle East

Title: Country Forecast Turkey May 2022

Publication title: Country Forecast. Turkey; New York

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09668632

e-ISSN: 20489730

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Statistics, Country Report

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2714191352

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-turkey-may-2022/docview/2714191352/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Russia May 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-russia-may-2022/docview/2731948648/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Russia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Russia+May+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-09&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Russia&amp;rft.issn=13507184&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Russia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Russia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Russia May 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Russia; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science--International Relations, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507184

e-ISSN: 20475721

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2731948648

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-russia-may-2022/docview/2731948648/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-05

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Samoa 2nd Quarter 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-samoa-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2731654680/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;rft.genre=report&amp;rft.jtitle=&amp;rft.atitle=&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-08&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=Country+Report+Samoa+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.title=Country+Report+Samoa+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.issn=&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Samoa; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: Samoa; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Samoa 2nd Quarter 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Samoa; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

e-ISSN: 20475527

Source type: Report

Language ofpublication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2731654680

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-samoa-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2731654680/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-04

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report China May 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-china-may-2022/docview/2730945509/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+China&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+China+May+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-06&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+China&amp;rft.issn=1473897X&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: China; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: China; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report China May 2022

Publication title: Country Report. China; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 1473897X

e-ISSN: 20474539

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2730945509

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-china-may-2022/docview/2730945509/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-02

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Vanuatu 2nd Quarter 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-vanuatu-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2730487122/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;rft.genre=report&amp;rft.jtitle=&amp;rft.atitle=&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-05&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=Country+Report+Vanuatu+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.title=Country+Report+Vanuatu+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.issn=&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Vanuatu; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: Vanuatu; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Vanuatu 2nd Quarter 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Vanuatu; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

e-ISSN: 20475551

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2730487122

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-vanuatu-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2730487122/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-11-01

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Israel May 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-israel-may-2022/docview/2730486952/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Israel&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Israel+May+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-05&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Israel&amp;rft.issn=17453259&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Israel; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Israel; Middle East

Title: Country Report Israel May 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Israel; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions

ISSN: 17453259

e-ISSN: 20475055

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2730486952

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-israel-may-2022/docview/2730486952/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2022-11-01

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Yemen 2nd Quarter 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-yemen-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2729344536/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Yemen&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Yemen+2nd+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-05-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Yemen&amp;rft.issn=14626675&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Yemen; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Yemen; Middle East

Title: Country Report Yemen 2nd Quarter 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Yemen; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: May 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 14626675

e-ISSN: 20476604

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2729344536

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-yemen-2nd-quarter-2022/docview/2729344536/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-10-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report United States April 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-united-states-april-2022/docview/2724935754/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+United+States+of+America&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+United+States+April+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-04-19&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+United+States+of+America&amp;rft.issn=13678876&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: North America; United States--US

Identifier / keyword: United States; North America

Title: Country Report United States April 2022

Publication title: Country Report. United States of America; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Apr 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13678876

e-ISSN: 20476035

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2724935754

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-united-states-april-2022/docview/2724935754/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2023-12-02

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Russia April 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-russia-april-2022/docview/2722771895/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Russia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Russia+April+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-04-12&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Russia&amp;rft.issn=13507184&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Russia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Russia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Russia April 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Russia; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Apr 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science--International Relations, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507184

e-ISSN: 20475721

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2722771895

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-russia-april-2022/docview/2722771895/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-10-09

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Indonesia April 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-indonesia-april-2022/docview/2714193683/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Economic outlook 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 3.7 5.2 4.9 5.0 5.7 5.5 Consumer price inflation (av, %) 1.6 4.2 3.4 2.2 2.7 2.3 Budget balance (% of GDP) -6.0 -4.8 -3.3 -2.9 -2.6 -2.3 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.3 0.5 -0.4 -0.8 -1.2 -1.2 3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 3.8 4.3 5.3 5.8 6.2 6.4 Exchange rate Rp:US$ (av) 14,308 14,897 16,024 15,957 16,333 16,698 We forecast that Indonesia's economy will grow by an annual average of 5.3% in 2022-26; this is largely on a par with rates of growth before the pandemic. Fact sheet Annual data 2021a Historical averages (%) 2017-21 Population (m) 270 Population growth 0.7 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 1,186 Real GDP growth 2.3 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 3,567 Real domestic demand growth 1.8 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 4,396 Inflation 1.9 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 13,221 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -1.5 Exchange rate (av) :US$ 14,308 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.9 a Actual. Political structure: Since that year, the directly elected People's Consultative Assembly (MPR) has comprised the 560-member House of People's Representatives (DPR, the legislature) and the 128-member Regional Representatives' Council (DPD). Since the fall of Suharto in 1998 the role of the DPR has been expanded and its power increased.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Indonesia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Indonesia+April+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-04-05&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Indonesia&amp;rft.issn=09669426&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - EIU expects the president, Joko Widodo (known as Jokowi) to step down in 2024, when his constitutionally stipulated final term ends. Jokowi's popularity is likely to remain elevated within his tenure. Dissent stemming from factors such as increases in the cost of living and business environment reforms will persist but not cause irreparable damage. Jockeying around presidential candidate nominations will also be a source of tension. Indonesia will further foster its ties with Association of South-East Asian Nation (ASEAN) countries. Ties with China will remain cordial but wary.

Indonesia--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.28 6.24 62 55 13 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.

- We expect Indonesia's business environment to improve in 2022-26 and this will lead to improvement in its global and regional rankings. There will be significant progress in the taxes, infrastructure, policy towards private enterprises and labour market categories. Although the Omnibus Law on Job Creation, which will improve the business environment on various fronts, was ruled unconstitutional in 2021, amendment to the law will preserve reform measures. Overall, we expect this to boost the scores for the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, taxes and policy towards private enterprise and competition categories. However, problems related to legal uncertainty, corruption and bureaucracy will constrain the overall business environment.

Indonesia--highlights: Economic outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 3.7 5.2 4.9 5.0 5.7 5.5
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 1.6 4.2 3.4 2.2 2.7 2.3
Budget balance (% of GDP) -6.0 -4.8 -3.3 -2.9 -2.6 -2.3
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.3 0.5 -0.4 -0.8 -1.2 -1.2
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 3.8 4.3 5.3 5.8 6.2 6.4
Exchange rate Rp:US$ (av) 14,308 14,897 16,024 15,957 16,333 16,698

- We forecast that Indonesia's economy will grow by an annual average of 5.3% in 2022-26; this is largely on a par with rates of growth before the pandemic. The government will continue to focus on improving the business environment to boost investment (domestic and foreign), particularly in infrastructure development. Investment into the mineral and extractive sectors will be significant. Private consumption will remain the primary driver of GDP growth in 2022-26, expanding by 5.5% per year. Exports of goods will be bolstered by expanding shipments of commodities in 2022. The country's current account will remain in surplus in 2022 amid a boom in global commodity prices-Indonesia is a main commodity exporter-and return to deficit thereafter as domestic demand and, specifically, capital imports rise towards the end of the forecast period (2022-26).

Indonesia--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2016 2021 2026
Total 258.2 269.8 280.6
 Male 130.0 135.8 141.1
 Female 128.2 134.0 139.5
Period averages (%)   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth   0.9 0.8
Working-age population growth   1.2 1.0
Labour force growth   2.2 0.9

- With a population of 269.8m in 2021, Indonesia is home to nearly 40% of the population in ASEAN. We forecast that population growth will slow slightly in 2022-26. The working-age population will grow at a slightly faster rate than the overall population, but will decelerate owing to falling birth rates. There are considerable differences in growth rates and density among Indonesia's various provinces.

Indonesia--highlights: Market opportunities   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,186.1 1,251.3 1,252.0 1,348.2 1,419.4 1,497.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 4,396 4,600 4,566 4,878 5,097 5,335
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 769.8 808.3 820.0 889.7 938.8 989.0
Household consumption (US$ bn) 659.7 695.1 706.9 767.0 809.3 852.6
Household consumption per head (US$) 2,450 2,560 2,580 2,780 2,910 3,040

- Indonesia's consumer market is one of the largest in South-east Asia, with a favourable demographic profile for consumer-oriented sectors in the medium to long term. GDP per head will remain modest, however, ensuring that demand will be greatest for lower-cost goods. Personal disposable income will grow substantially over 2022-26. The proportion of income spent on food is likely to fall, with a bigger proportion spent on housing and transport, among other discretionary purchases. A growing urban high-net-worth population in cities means that there will also be an expanding market for high-end consumer goods.

Indonesia--highlights: Long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 4.1 3.2 3.5
Growth of real GDP 4.9 3.7 4.1
Labour productivity growth 2.9 3.2 3.1

- Indonesia will maintain a healthy economic expansion during the long-term forecast period. We forecast that real GDP growth will average 3.5% per year in 2022-50. The average age of the population will increase slowly, which will temper growth momentum towards 2050. Steady progress in improving the business environment, notably in easing regulations, will boost investment and increase productivity. As the largest economy in ASEAN, Indonesia will become an important player on the global stage and is likely to play a leading role in the functioning of ASEAN.

Fact sheet Annual data 2021 a Historical averages (%) 2017-21
Population (m) 270 Population growth 0.7
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 1,186 Real GDP growth 2.3
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 3,567 Real domestic demand growth 1.8
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 4,396 Inflation 1.9
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 13,221 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -1.5
Exchange rate (av) :US$ 14,308 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.9
a Actual.
Background: Republican forces led by Sukarno (Indonesia's first president) declared independence from the Netherlands in 1945. Sukarno was ousted in a coup led by General Suharto in 1967, following a near-collapse of the economy. Suharto presided over three decades of authoritarian government before being forced to resign in 1998 amid an economic and social crisis. Indonesia then experienced far-reaching political reform, known as the reformasi period, which ushered in more democratic government, including direct presidential elections. In 2014 Joko Widodo (known as Jokowi) became Indonesia's seventh president. Jokowi is the first president to come from outside the traditional political establishment.
Political structure: In 2004 the president and vice-president were elected directly for the first time. Since that year, the directly elected People's Consultative Assembly (MPR) has comprised the 560-member House of People's Representatives (DPR, the legislature) and the 128-member Regional Representatives' Council (DPD). Since the fall of Suharto in 1998 the role of the DPR has been expanded and its power increased. In 2019 presidential and legislative elections were held concurrently for the first time in Indonesia's history.
Policy issues: The government's short-term priority is directing funds and resources to the healthcare system and to vulnerable workers and households. Once the pandemic has been contained, the government will resume its focus on boosting investment, primarily to create jobs. This will be spearheaded by the Omnibus Law on Job Creation. The authorities will also try to improve standards of governance and reduce corruption, which raises producer costs significantly and deters investment. The administration has also moved to dismantle some of the barriers impeding foreign investment, such as the dominance of state-owned enterprises in some industries, but economic nationalism will continue to overshadow policymaking.
Taxation: Marginal tax rates range from 5% to 35%. A 10% value-added tax (VAT) is levied on most goods and services, but it will rise to 11% in 2022. A special sales tax of 10-12.5% is imposed on most luxury items. The corporate tax rate is 22%.
Foreign trade: Data from Statistics Indonesia show that merchandise imports grew to US$189bn in 2021, from US$135.1bn in 2020, and goods exports soared to US$232.8bn, from US$163.4bn in 2020. This yielded a substantial merchandise trade surplus of US$43.8bn, up from US$28.3bn in 2020.
Major exports 2021 % of total Major imports 2021 % of total
Manufacture products 75.5 Raw materials & auxiliary materials 75.1
Mining & other sector products 20.8 Capital goods 14.6
Agricultural products 2.9 Consumer goods 10.3
Unclassified products 0.7 Unclassified imports 0.0
       
Leading markets 2021 % of total Leading suppliers 2021 % of total
China 19.4 China 27.2
US 11.3 Japan 7.5
Japan 8.3 Singapore 6.3
Singapore 6.9 US 5.8
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance Indonesia is a presidential democracy with a 575-seat legislature, the House of People's Representatives (DPR). The president, who is the head of government as well as head of state, is allowed to serve up to two terms in office. The current president, Joko Widodo (known as Jokowi), took office in October 2014. Jokowi won a second presidential term following elections in April 2019, when parliamentary and presidential elections were held concurrently for the first time in Indonesia's history. He governs with the backing of eight parties (out of ten in the DPR), which currently hold 471 out of 575 parliamentary seats. Jokowi's most significant backers are the Indonesian Democratic Party-Struggle (PDI-P) and Golkar, Indonesia's oldest political party. EIU expects Jokowi, who has a good track record of consensus building, to enjoy reasonably strong support from parliament during his remaining term in office.
Jokowi's coalition will dominate parliament until next election due 2024 During the 2019 election campaign Jokowi faced accusations that he was "anti-Islam". To deflect such claims and boost his standing among voters, Jokowi nominated Ma'ruf Amin, a cleric and the current chair of the Indonesian Ulema Council (MUI, the country's largest Muslim clerical body), as his running mate. In addition, two major Islamic parties, the National Awakening Party (PKB) and National Mandate Party (PAN), are also in Jokowi's coalition. The third-largest party to support Jokowi, the Great Indonesia Movement Party (Gerindra), fielded its head, Prabowo Subianto, as a rival to Jokowi in the 2019 election. However, after his defeat, Mr Subianto joined Jokowi's cabinet as defence minister, with Gerindra joining the governing coalition. Against this broad coalition, the opposition parties-the Democratic Party (PD) and the Prosperous Justice Party (PKS)-will have only weak influence.
Parliamentary forces, April 2022
(no. of seats in the House of People's Representatives, or DPR)
Onward Indonesia Cabinet 471
 Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P) 128
 Golkar 85
 Gerindra 78
 NasDem 59
 National Awakening Party (PKB) 58
 National Mandate Party (PAN) 44
 United Development Party (PPP) 19
Oppositions 104
 Democratic Party (PD) 54
 Prosperous Justice Party (PKS) 50
Total 575
Source: House of People's Representatives (DPR).
Political outlook: Political stability We expect the president, Jokowi, to serve out his full (mandated) second term, which will end in 2024. Popular government initiatives, such as an anti-corruption drive, combined with Jokowi's enduring support base in the DPR (the legislature) will also ensure that his government remains in power until 2024. Support for the president in the DPR comes mainly from the Indonesian Democratic Party-Struggle (PDI-P, which supported his presidential candidacy in 2014 and 2019), Golkar and the Great Indonesia Movement Party (Gerindra). Jokowi has accommodated a wide range of political groups in his cabinet, including members of several parties, former military personnel and religious figures. Among these is his opponent in the 2019 presidential election, Mr Subianto, who serves as defence minister. Jokowi will maintain broad factional representation in the cabinet during the remainder of his tenure. This will underpin coalition stability (and ensure that the oppo-sition remains weak), but will come at the expense of decisive policymaking.
Jokowi's anti-corruption drive will continue to claim high-level officials, but subjects for investigation will be selected carefully to avoid any wider impact on political stability. As a result, significant pushback against this campaign among politicians or a disintegration of the ruling coalition is not part of our baseline forecast.
Tensions between secular and Muslim-based political forces will persist. The vice-president, Ma'ruf Amin, is the head of the country's top Muslim clerical body and will help Jokowi to maintain the support of small (but influential) Islamic parties and the broader Muslim community. Both secular and religious-oriented reforms are unlikely to make headway in parliament. Nevertheless, the government will maintain pressure on hardline and separatist movements. Crackdowns will limit the risk of communal violence and terrorist attacks.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness The country will make slow progress on political reforms in 2022-26. In 2014 the Constitutional Court ruled that the 2019 legislative and presidential elections must be held on the same day, which would increase the likelihood of the DPR being politically aligned with the presidency, reducing horse-trading between parties on the outcome of the presidential poll. We expect that these elections will also be held concurrently in 2024. However, the ruling did not remove the requirement that presidential candidates may be nominated only by parties, or coalitions of parties, that hold at least 20% of the seats in the DPR. This means that presidential and vice-presidential contenders will need to make compromises over their policy agendas either with main political parties or a group of smaller parties. This might lead to narrow and populist influences on policymaking.
Improving the efficiency of the bureaucracy will remain a priority Corruption remains rife and extends to most levels of government and throughout the judiciary. Pervasive graft means that the legal system is unpredictable and frequently favours local interests. The Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK) enjoys significant public support. However, its independence and power has been weakened; KPK is now a regular civil service body regulated by an oversight board from the government. Some prominent investigators were disqualified from the organisation in the process. Although the KPK still demonstrates its commitment and capacity to prosecute senior officials (in 2020 two ministers were arrested on graft charges), its room for operation is curtailed by political factors. KPK is likely to continue investigating senior officials without fear or favour, but its action will be subjected to more political pressure.
Appointments to public-sector posts are not always based on merit. At lower levels, cronyism remains a significant problem, resulting in a lack of competence among many public officials. At higher levels, favouritism and horse-trading to keep the favours of coalition partners are also a problem. Political dynasties remain deeply embedded within regional- and national-level governance structures; for instance, Jokowi's son and son-in-law occupied regional-level positions in 2021. Skill shortages in the civil service are also likely to remain a problem throughout 2022-26.
In 2005 direct elections were extended to the regional level to make governors and district chiefs more accountable to the local population, rather than influential elites in regional capitals. This devolution of power has led to persistent and ongoing concerns about local financial management and inadequate skills among officials at this level. However, direct elections have noticeably improved the central government's responsiveness towards the policy needs of local governments in many areas and hastened the emergence of new political leaders such as Jokowi. This has also helped to break the stranglehold of the business and political elites that had, until then, dominated Indonesian politics.
Political outlook: Election watch The next parliamentary and presidential elections are scheduled to be held concurrently before April 2024. The PDI-P secured 128 seats in the DPR in the 2019 poll, ahead of Golkar, which won 85 seats. Jokowi's governing coalition commands 471 out of 575 seats in the chamber.
Despite calls from certain factions within the coalition to allow Jokowi to serve an unprecedented third term, the president has explicitly rejected the idea, as it goes against the constitution. Those in favour of extending his term would need to garner significant support from both chambers to amend the constitution, which looks unattainable for the foreseeable future. Jockeying among potential successors will be a feature of the political scene in 2022-24. As Jokowi does not have his own party, it is unlikely that he will anoint a political heir. However, his track record could galvanise other reformist candidates to participate in the next presidential election. Ganjar Pranowo and Anies Baswedan, the governors of Central Java and Jakarta (the capital) respectively, are potential candidates. Mr Subianto is also likely to run again in 2024. The president is manoeuvring his relatives into political roles, with his son and son-in-law securing mayoral positions in regional polls held in December 2020. However, they are not expected to play a major part on the national political scene before the 2024 parliamentary election.
Political outlook: International relations Indonesia will look to maintain a leading diplomatic role in the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), supported by its permanent hosting of the association's secretariat. However, political differences between members will stall co-operation on major issues and further integration will be slow, meaning that this responsibility will create only modest benefits for Indonesia.
Indonesia's foreign policy will be driven primarily by its economic interests, and the country will remain non-aligned amid growing competition in the region between China and the US. Having traditionally maintained a low profile, Indonesia will receive more international attention through its hosting of the G20 summit in 2022. The country will use the summit to rally for rule-based inter-national order and competition, and will avoid direct conflicts involving the US and China. It will also make use of the publicity generated by its G20 presidency to attract more foreign direct investment (FDI).
Indonesia has not condemned Russia for its invasion of Ukraine and has refrained from imposing sanctions. The comparatively neutral stance reflects its security consi-derations: Russia is an important supplier of arms to Indonesia-a situation that has incentivised the government to keep relations cordial. Further escalation in the conflict could create friction between Indonesia and the US, as well as Australia and other important regional diplomatic partners.
Indonesia's strategic location makes it pivotal in the US government's Indo-Pacific strategy. The government will strive to maintain amicable relations with the US, especially in the light of concerns that China could step up claims on maritime territory within Indonesia's exclusive economic zone. Equally, Indonesia is concerned that a wider US security footprint in the region-as indicated by the AUKUS partnership between Australia, the UK and the US-could affect regional stability. Ties with Australia will remain stable, under-pinned by a deepening trade and investment relationship.
Indonesia's ties with China will remain cordial but cautious. Although Jokowi has welcomed Chinese investment in infrastructure and manufacturing, the public perception that these projects rely on imported workers has tainted opinions of China's influence. FDI from China (including Hong Kong) will trend upwards in 2022-26, but flows from other South-east Asia countries, Japan and the EU will remain important.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
Overall position 5.28 6.24 62 55 13 11
Political environment 4.1 5.2 70 56 15 12
 Political stability 4.8 5.9 68 52 16 10
 Political effectiveness 3.6 4.5 64 58 14 13
Macroeconomic environment 7.2 6.3 37 55 12 14
Market opportunities 6.6 7.2 12 15 3 4
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 3.8 5.3 69 55 16 11
Policy towards foreign investment 5.1 6.0 66 57 16 11
Foreign trade & exchange controls 7.3 7.8 50 47 11 11
Taxes 5.6 7.3 52 25 13 9
Financing 5.1 6.3 59 52 13 12
The labour market 5.3 6.5 69 40 16 10
Infrastructure 3.5 5.3 76 64 16 12
Technological readiness 4.7 5.8 66 60 15 12
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Indonesia's score in the EIU's business environment ranking rises from 5.28 in 2017-21 to 6.24 in 2022-26. Consequently, its global position rises by seven places, from 62nd to 55th, while its ranking in Asia and Australasia climbs from 13th to 11th out of 17 economies. The increase in the overall score is driven by improvements in the scores for the labour market, taxes, policy towards private enterprise, market opportunities and political environment. However, the scores for the macroeconomic environment category will deteriorate. Although infrastructure was a weak point for Indonesia in the historical period, it will improve markedly in 2022-26.
The country's huge consumer market ensures that it scores very well in the market oppor-tunities category. The score for macroeconomic environment slips in 2022-26, and a more robust recovery from the disruption caused by the coronavirus pandemic among other economies means that Indonesia's global ranking tumbles by 18 places for this category. Efforts by the Ministry of Finance to lighten and simplify the tax burden and retrieve unpaid revenue will bear fruit in 2022-26 and are behind the significant improvement in the taxes score, raising Indonesia's global rank to 25th place.
A coalition with diverse objectives will hamper the reform agenda Indonesia's political environment is problematic. The country's democracy is still young. The president, Joko Widodo (known as Jokowi), will remain in power until the end of his second five-year term in 2024 and will provide a steady hand. However, his ability to push through political reforms will be hamstrung by an unwieldy coalition with highly diverse views. Many in the country oppose Jokowi's technocratic approach. Some senior politicians would prefer a return to a patronage-based system, and others seek to restrict social freedoms through promoting a stricter form of Islam. Jokowi's balancing act will be to keep these groups mollified, while pursuing his own goals.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Indonesia's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: Some unprofitable state-owned enterprises are consolidated, but their component businesses continue to enjoy preferential treatment in comparison with private competitors.
2024-26: Tax incentives are offered to small and medium-sized enterprises in strategic sectors, including the manufacture of electric vehicle components and machinery.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: The government releases a list of priority sectors that are fully open to foreign investment, on the basis of the Omnibus Law on Job Creation; the list includes high-technology services and manufacturing industries.
2024-26: The government signals a willingness to entertain foreign investment to accelerate a transition towards green energy.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: The House of People's Representatives finally ratifies the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). The government continues to tinker with non-tariff barriers in areas such as food and energy.
2024-26: The government implements the harmonisation of customs procedures and e-services regulation as required under RCEP.
Taxes 2022-23: The standard rate of value-added tax (VAT) is raised from 10% to 11%. Tax collection is boosted through an undeclared assets scheme.
2024-26: Tax enforcement is stepped up against suspect shell companies following the end of a tax amnesty period. The VAT rate is raised slightly again. A nationwide carbon tax is rolled out in 2025.
Financing 2022-23: The government encourages lending to micro, small and medium-sized enterprises to facilitate job creation.
2024-26: Banking-sector liberalisation-in line with the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Banking Integration Framework-expands cross-border financing options for firms.
The labour market 2022-23: Provincial minimum-wage rises remain moderate, given the easy availability of labour.
2024-26: Labour-intensive industries continue to migrate from West Java and the capital, Jakarta, to less developed regions.
Infrastructure 2022-23: New road and port projects reduce transit times and logistics costs. Work resumes on the relocation of the capital.
2024-26: Some projects relating to capital relocation are operational, improving physical infrastructure in East Kalimantan.
Technological readiness 2022-23: The penetration of e-commerce to rural areas grows markedly.
2024-26: 5G information-communication services are rolled out to cities across the country.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
7.2 6.3 37 55 12 14
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Indonesia's score for macroeconomic environment slips from 7.2 in 2017-21 to 6.3 in 2022-26. Although the economy is forecast to expand at a relatively impressive annual average rate of 5.2% in 2022 and consumer price inflation is expected to be well contained in 2022-26, there are some major risks. The economy has twin deficits on its fiscal and external accounts, which are likely to become more expensive to finance as global interest rates rise. The currency, the rupiah, is perpetually at risk of depreciation depending on foreign investor sentiment. The policymaking process is likely to be under the pressure of compromises, given the multiple coalitions that Jokowi has to take into consideration. There is also a sizeable risk that Jokowi's successor will have a more economically nationalistic outlook and either undoes or discontinues the efforts made by Jokowi's administration to make the economy more competitive.
The government wants to maintain its credibility as a responsible borrower
- Throughout the forecast period the government will maintain a focus on restoring discipline to the fiscal account, following a period of higher spending to combat the pandemic. Since the 1997 Asian financial crisis, which wrecked Indonesia's economy, successive governments have run tight fiscal policies to demonstrate to international investors that it is a responsible borrower, in order to lower external financing costs. This strategy has been broadly successful. However, the pandemic forced it to increase spending dramatically, such that the House of People's Representatives (DPR, the legislature) passed new bills to permit the government to run much wider fiscal deficits. In 2022-26 the government will seek to maintain its reputation for prudence, while also trying to achieve its priorities, such as developing infrastructure and strengthening the social safety net.
- A period of high global commodity prices, at least in the first half of the forecast period, will provide the government with extra revenue from export sales. However, it will have to balance additional resources with the impact on consumers of more expensive food staples and inputs. It is engaged in a long-term battle to reduce the size of its fuel-subsidy bill and will seek to ensure that it provides some relief for consumers at the same time as narrowing its budget deficit.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
3.8 5.3 69 55 16 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Rising by 14 places in the global ranking, Indonesia will make strides in improving its policy towards private enterprise and competition in 2022-26. Jokowi's administration has undertaken various measures to ease licensing processes and remove onerous regulations on small and medium-sized enterprises. The government is likely to privatise and consolidate some state-owned assets owing to fiscal constraints and efficiency concerns. The process will prove controversial and, in many cases, be subject to political and popular opposition. Progress will also vary by sectors. The country has a long history of prevarication over the desirable role of the market in the economy; ongoing debate on this subject will slow the pace of reform in 2022-26. It is also possible that the government's stance will shift considerably following the 2024 elections, as the tone is set by the president. Efforts by vested interests to maintain a system of protectionism and patronage will be more successful in some areas than others. Powerful oligarchic figures and rent-seeking structures linked to politicians will remain harder to dislodge. Major public-sector corruption scandals will continue to be uncovered by the Anti-Corruption Commission (KPK).
The authority's PPP initiative will benefit private businesses
- The government will return to its initiative of boosting the number of public-private partnerships (PPP) in 2022-26. It has made more sectors eligible for private investment through PPP structures, including tourism, education, health and the environment. Infrastructure will be another priority. The finance ministry will seek to block frontline ministries from disbursing state funding to projects offering higher rates of return, ensuring that limited state funds target less economical but strategically important projects.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.1 6.0 66 57 16 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
We believe that conditions for foreign investment will improve gradually in the next five years, enabling a notable rise in both Indonesia's score and its global and regional ranking. The size of the domestic market will ensure that capital flows increase as the country's young population-with its growing disposable income and rising access to credit-continues to spend. The publication of a New Investment List in May 2021, which replaces the "negative investment list" (DNI), means that more sectors are now being opened up for foreign direct investment. Notably, foreign investment in technology start-ups in Special Economic Zones is exempt from the minimum investment threshold of Rp10bn (US$696,940). This bodes well for the government's digitalisation push. However, long-standing concerns about nationalist-leaning court decisions and corruption will continue to inhibit potential inflows. Foreign investment in mining and oil palm plantations will continue to fall as a result of a moratorium on new licences implemented in 2016. The moratorium lapsed in 2021, but the government has pledged not to approve any new permits.
Support for battery manufacturers will ensure Indonesia's global prominence
- An amendment to the 2009 mining law passed in 2020 requires foreign-owned mining companies to divest a 51% shareholding to domestic mining entities over the course of the forecast period. However, it now allows for more flexibility in transferring the operating permit, despite the fact that approval is still needed from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources. For decades Indonesia's natural-resources sector has attracted foreign investors, but the export of unprocessed mineral ores has been banned since 2014. The government intends to encourage the development of domestic refining capacity and to raise the value-added of exports. Rules issued in 2017 require miners to convert existing contracts into new licences, which would dilute existing rights and mean more onerous tax liabilities, and requires coal exporters to use local insurers and transporters. These will hinder foreign investment. However, large amounts of new investment are needed to upgrade ageing mines. The government's dependence on revenue from the mining sector means that it will not abandon these restrictive policies in 2022-26. At the same time, the government will support and incentivise electronic vehicle battery manufacturers to set up nickel mines and plants in Indonesia, with the intention of keeping the value-added of finished products within the country.
- In early 2022 three major state-owned enterprises, including a public oil company, Pertamina, and a state electricity distributor, PLN, signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on pursuing decarbonisation through green energy sources and storage. The MOU suggests that the government is beginning to take the possibility of a green energy transition seriously, raising the likelihood that the sector could become a major destination for foreign investment in the second half of the decade. That said, negotiations with state-owned enterprises are likely to prove trickier for foreign entities than working with the private sector, given divergent views on outside investment within the government.
- Foreign businesses will continue to report quicker permit issuance owing to the single window established by the Investment Co-ordinating Board (BKPM). Jokowi has instructed ministries and agencies to streamline the payment of duties and other administrative requirements at the country's ports under a single window. This policy is broad in scope-more than a dozen ministries and government agencies are affected. It is therefore facing implementation challenges, but tangible changes from the policy will become increasingly apparent. Deregulation measures passed in 2020 eliminated most licences issued by the central government under the single window framework.

The government is determined to permit more foreign investment
- In 2021 the government announced a major liberalisation of its DNI, which sets sectoral investment terms on foreign investment. Jokowi is keen to attract more foreign funding, and the new DNI regulations permit much greater investment than previously. The government now groups the economy into four sectors: priority areas where foreign investment is encouraged through tax and non-tax incentives (such as robotics and aircraft manufacturing); sectors where partnerships with local firms are required (including shipbuilding and sugar); industries with investment restrictions, where those with foreign-ownership ceilings reside (such as postal services and media outlets); and those not included in the first three categories, in which there are no restrictions. There are areas where the revised DNI appears to clash with existing legislation. Logging, for example, now appears in the unrestricted list, but is subject to other regulations that could make compliance difficult for foreign investors. Inconsistent rulings by the Business Competition Supervisory Commission (KPPU) will also deter foreign investors, and local courts will sometimes fail to uphold the rights of foreign firms in the face of pressure from officials and domestic competitors.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
7.3 7.8 50 47 11 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
The score for foreign trade and exchange controls rises a little in 2022-26, enabling Indonesia to rise by three places in our global rankings, to 47th, but its regional ranking remains at 11th. The process of trade liberalisation will continue to make gradual progress, amid disagreements between economic liberals and nationalists over whether Indonesia benefits from free trade. The country is a member of the new Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), although the national parliament has yet to ratify this megaregional trade pact. The local currency, the rupiah, will remain freely convertible on the current account and for most capital-account transactions.
Non-tariff trade barriers will remain major obstacles
- Indonesia's use of non-tariff barriers will remain significant. The government regularly tinkers with lists of goods that are banned from being imported (to promote the development of local industries) or exported (to prevent shortages of domestically produced products) depending on market conditions and global prices. For example, exports of coal were banned for a month in January 2022 after local supplies had dwindled. Simultaneously, the government is trying to simplify the foreign trade regime; in late 2021 the Ministry of Trade issued a new, single guideline outlying categories of goods that were banned from entering and leaving the country. The Ministry of Industry has a wider strategic goal of reducing import reliance across sectors. Lobbying by local manufacturers of consumer electronics and garments will lead the government to maintain anti-dumping policies against foreign companies.
- RCEP will increase the trade flow of Indonesia within the region in the latter half of the forecast period. However, the push of demand will only be moderate, as existing free-trade agreements have reduced tariffs markedly. Harmonisation of regulations will integrate Indonesia into the regional supply chain. Indonesia has yet to ratify RCEP, as some lawmakers fear that it will make Indonesia reliant on importing manufactured goods. However, we expect the country to ratify the treaty in the first half of 2022, as the benefits outweigh such concerns. Non-tariff barriers will remain prevalent even after RCEP comes into effect.
- Bank Indonesia (BI, the central bank) will continue to intervene in the currency market, as well as lift local interest rates, to manage the value of the rupiah. Over the next five years we expect the rupiah to continue to depreciate against the US dollar; BI will work to ensure that this weakening is gradual and does not result in large increases in the cost of borrowing from international markets. We do not expect the central bank to resort to large-scale capital controls to contain currency depreciation, but that remains a risk in the event of a serious deterioration in the economy.

The central bank will prioritise currency stability over growth
- Minor restrictions on capital account activity will remain. In periods of external financial stress, BI will introduce regulations to raise the level of foreign-exchange reserves or deter capital flight, such as imposing minimum holding periods for central bank bonds (known as BI certificates). The bank will continue to publish reforms to deepen the domestic capital market. The take-up of domestic non-deliverable forward contracts will lower hedging costs for companies and improve rupiah stability when the currency faces pressure.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.6 7.3 52 25 13 9
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Indonesia's global ranking in the taxes category jumps from 52nd in 2017-21 to 25th in 2022-26 and its regional position climbs from 13th to ninth. The technocratic minister of finance, Sri Mulyani Indrawati, has made efforts to streamline the tax process to reduce tax avoidance. This is reflected in the increase in the score from 5.6 to 7.3. The administration rolled out numerous tax holidays in the historical period in a bid to encourage new investment. However, a deterioration in the public finances on account of the coronavirus pandemic prompted the government to pass the Harmonisation of Tax Regulations (HPP) Law in late 2021. The HPP cancelled a planned phased reduction in corporation tax, which now remains at 22%, rather than the planned cut to 20%. It also introduced a rise in value-added tax from 10% to 11% from April 2022 and another rise, to 12%, at an unspecified time before January 2025. The number of goods and services applicable for VAT has also been increased and now includes medical and financial services, for example. A new income tax bracket, of 35% for those earning above Rp5bn per year, was also introduced. Our expectation that the HPP will lead to an increase in the overall tax take is factored into our forecast for a narrowing budget deficit as a proportion of GDP in 2022-26. That said, the overall tax take will remain low relative to comparable economies, and this will limit the government's ability to spend to support and develop the economy.

- Another facet of the HPP is the introduction of a carbon tax, which took effect in April 2022. Initially, it applies only to coal-fired power stations and takes the form of a cap and tax system. Each power provider will be given a limit on their permitted emissions and any above this level will be subject to an additional tax of Rp30,000 (US$2) per kilogram. The nationwide rollout of a full carbon tax scheme has been set for 2025.
- As part of its plans to repair the public finances, the finance ministry has rolled out a Voluntary Asset Disclosure Programme (known locally as PPS), which runs for the first half of 2022. The PPS enables those with previously undeclared assets to make their ownership official and to do so without penalty, provided that they pay tax on their value. Tax rates are more generous for those that participated in a previous scheme, which ran in 2016-17. Ms Mulyani disclosed in March that the first two months of the scheme had yielded declarations worth Rp22trn (US$1.4bn). The idea is that the PPS will itself prove lucrative and that it will enable the government to pursue those that opt against declaring their assets more aggressively once the scheme has concluded.

Expatriate workers will continue to enjoy tax exemptions
- The government will lessen the burden on expatriate workers by providing exemptions from worldwide taxation. At present Indonesia taxes expats on their income from wherever in the world it is generated, which means that employees working in Indonesia pay tax on assets regardless of country. This has made Indonesia a relatively less attractive place to work in South-east Asia. However, in the coming years the finance ministry is likely to create exemptions for a range of occupations, which will remove an obstacle to working in the country for employees in these roles.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.1 6.3 59 52 13 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Indonesia's score for financing improves from 5.1 in the historical period to 6.3 in the forecast period, pushing up its global ranking by seven places to 52nd. The driver of these improvements is the opening up of more sectors to foreign investment as part of the 2020 Omnibus Law on Job Creation. We believe that by raising the foreign investment ceilings in sectors from healthcare to fisheries, the government will improve access to capital markets for foreigners. That said, we note the continued undercurrent of economic nationalism, which means that this investment may not be welcomed in every sector. The natural resources sector stands out as an area that is likely to remain starved of capital, partly because of more restrictive business environments than other sectors.
Credit growth will slow from 2022 amid a series of rate rises
- Aided by a strict adherence to Basel III banking standards, commercial banks will remain adequately capitalised in 2022-26. The rate of credit growth is poised to slow in line with a period of rising interest rates that will begin around mid-2022. Weaknesses persist in credit-risk management at banks, but there has been steady improvement, helped by the creation of the independent Financial Services Authority (OJK) in 2011. New hedging requirements on companies seeking fresh external debt have slowed the growth of Indonesia's private-debt liability.
- Indonesia's banking system is among the most profitable in the world, with wide deposit-lending margins. The government will encourage the development of the non-bank financial sector in 2022-26, including the insurance, pension, mutual-fund, venture-capital and financial leasing industries. A 2017 regulation issued by the OJK caps lending from financial technology companies at Rp2bn per customer, amid strong growth in new peer-to-peer lenders registered with the authority. However, the ongoing weakness of non-bank finance in the country limits access to sources of long-term funding. Since 2015 private insurers and pension funds have had to compete with a national social security scheme, which provides employment benefits including old-age pensions, workplace-accident benefits and life insurance.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
5.3 6.5 69 40 16 10
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
The Omnibus Law on Job Creation lowers severance costs Indonesia's score for the labour market improves in 2022-26. Its global ranking rises by 29 places to 40th and its regional position strengthens to tenth, from 16th in the historical period. The business environment will continue to face significant constraints from a lack of skilled workers, and hiring foreign staff will remain expensive. However, some much-needed flexibility has been brought into the labour market through the Omnibus Law. Severance payments have been cut (and a government fund has been created to provide redundant employees with some additional help), and restrictions on overtime, outsourcing and the roles that can be filled by foreign workers have all been relaxed. Sectoral minimum wages have also been replaced by rates set by regional governments, although this is unlikely to markedly slow their growth. Trade unions complained noisily but to little effect. We believe that the labour market will become more dynamic as a result, but the effects of the reforms will be partly obscured by the pandemic. Other factors, such as an improvement in the quality of education and a moderate pace of inflation (making the cost of living cheaper than competitor economies), also contribute to a stronger score.

- Only 10-15% of the labour force is unionised, but historically labour unions achieved high nominal wage increases. However, wage inflation will moderate in 2022-26, and will be tied more closely to productivity. Organised labour movements led by union officials will press for commensurately higher minimum wages if the government reduces retail fuel subsidies.

The process of decentralisation will be gradual
- There will be a gradual shift in geographical manufacturing concentration in the forecast period, with labour-intensive industries (particularly garments and textiles) migrating from the capital, Jakarta, and West Java to Central and East Java, where wages are lower. Government and industry efforts to build managerial colleges and vocational facilities in these regions will support this transition. Job creation in special economic zones will increase, albeit slowly. Local-content rules for smartphone manufacturers will lead to new assembly facilities, but few new factories.
- Efforts to streamline the hiring of foreign talent will continue, but progress will remain slow. In 2018 the government issued a regulation that simplified the process for acquiring foreign-worker permits. Notably, the Expatriate Placement Plan, which requires firms not only to hire an Indonesian counterpart for every foreign worker, but also to provide that local employee with a training plan, has been removed for the most senior categories of foreign workers and for those scheduled to work for less than six months. Such reforms will support investment in higher-value-added sectors such as e-commerce. Additionally, a regulation enacted in early 2021 requires the Ministry of Manpower to review and decide on foreign workforce hiring applications within two business days to shorten the time taken to hire foreign nationals. That said, the government will remain cautious about reducing restrictions on foreign workers owing to a large and growing local labour force. Future administrations will continue to balance such policies with efforts to boost local skills in order to appease the electorate.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
3.5 5.3 76 64 16 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
In the infrastructure category, Indonesia's score has risen from 3.5 in 2017-21 to 5.3 in 2022-26, but faster improvements elsewhere mean that the country's global ranking slips by 12 places to 64th. Its regional position drops to 12th. The country scores poorly in most sub-categories, with the exception of telecommunications. Indonesia's island-based geography, combined with limited fiscal resources, poses a challenge to its infrastructure development. That said, the government has ambitious plans and has made infrastructure a strategic priority. Achieving its goals at a time when it is trying to narrow its budget deficit will be tricky, however, and will probably require foreign investment.

- Indonesia faces some of the region's highest logistics costs, stemming from an underdeveloped rail and road network and inadequate electricity supplies. Moreover, it is reliant on a handful of overcrowded airports and ports. The government allocated Rp385trn to infrastructure in its 2022 budget, which is broadly in line with recent trends. The administration is encouraging local governments to spend money that has been languishing in regional banks, and BI is increasing its presence in the 34 provinces to expedite spending.

The government seeks multiple sources to fund infrastructure projects
- The finance ministry will continue to issue green sharia-compliant bonds to fund applicable infrastructure projects throughout the forecast period. The government will also seek to attract blended finance via the Tri Hita Karana Roadmap.
- Soon after taking office in 2014 Jokowi signed a policy document mandating the construction of 200 infrastructure projects, around one-quarter of which are new toll roads. In 2019 Indonesia's first mass-rapid transit line opened in Jakarta; an extension of the current line began in early 2021. The addition of a fourth terminal to raise the capacity of the Soekarno-Hatta International Airport in the city will be completed in 2024.

Relocation of the capital will not be completed in the forecast period
- The biggest infrastructure project envisaged by the Jokowi administration is an ambitious relocation of the capital from Jakarta to a new location, christened Nusantara, in East Kalimantan. Legislation to permit the move and define the new city's boundaries was passed by the DPR in early 2022. The establishment of a new body to deliver the project, the Nusantara National Capital Authority, was also approved. The scale of the project is daunting. The government has currently budgeted costs of Rp127trn for the relocation in the period to 2024, by which time it hopes to have basic infrastructure installed for the relocation of 15,000 civil servants and their families. It hopes to raise about four times that sum through PPP tenders and private contracts. Given the pressure put on the public finances since the start of the pandemic, these funding sources may have to be renewed, which could threaten the feasibility of the project. Financing for many of the less viable tenders will be hard to achieve in the forecast period as the government diverts non-essential spending to the economic recovery. We believe that the fate of the project will largely lie with Jokowi's successor, given that the government will struggle to make significant progress on the project in the period to 2024 and the presidential transition.
- Many of Jokowi's other priority infrastructure projects will also struggle to meet their delivery dates. The Jakarta-Bandung high-speed railway and the Jakarta Bay reclamation project, for example, will be delayed, but are still likely to be completed in the forecast period. New utility projects, such as geothermal plants, will also move slowly. However, several toll roads will open early in the forecast period, and these will cut logistics costs, with upsides for local productivity.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26 2017-21 2022-26
4.7 5.8 66 60 15 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Indonesia's score for technological readiness rises from 4.7 in the historical period to 5.8 in the forecast period, pushing up its global ranking by six spots to 60th and its regional ranking to 12th. Only four of the more than 200 strategic infrastructure projects overseen by the Committee for the Acceleration of Priority Infrastructure Delivery (KPPIP) are defined as technology projects. However, Indonesia does have the capacity and skills to implement sophisticated technology projects. The Palapa Ring, completed in 2019, resulted in 13,000km of undersea cable being laid to provide all of the country's provinces with fast internet connection, at the modest cost of US$1.5bn. The government is also keen to facilitate progress in high-tech sectors like robotics and advanced manufacturing, although we expect that progress will be limited.
Improvement in e-payments will boost e-commerce development
- BI will issue additional policies to strengthen its 2017 regulatory framework for the National Payment Gateway, an online public-services payment platform. This will enable more consumers to access essential services online, such as electricity and mobile-phone data plans. We also expect access to credit through financial technology to improve in the forecast period. Logistics costs for e-commerce companies will fall as new and more efficient delivery systems make use of improving transport infrastructure and technology, in turn enhancing the competitiveness of online retail. The rollout of 5G services will begin mid-way through the forecast period.
- The National Cyber and Encryption Agency, established in 2018, will grow in capacity in the forecast period, helped in part by co-operation with other countries in the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Singapore government, in particular. However, weaknesses in cyber-security will persist owing to the ubiquity of outdated and pirated software. The Ministry of Information and Technology will launch programmes to boost technology partnerships, which will involve both universities and local start-ups. Indonesia will continue to see few engineers graduating from university, which will hinder domestic innovation.

Economic forecast: Policy trends New cases of covid-19 have trended downwards in recent months, although a moderate level of restrictions has been in force since early February. Indonesia is likely to have fully vaccinated 60% of its population by end-April, and the government has loosened restrictions on public activity. The rollout of booster shots will be more protracted, however. EIU does not expect 60% of the population to have received a booster shot by end-2023.
Temporary tax breaks and concessional financing for small and medium-sized businesses will be offered in 2022 to facilitate economic recovery and to offset some of the adverse effects of rising policy interest rates. Other policy support will be limited, owing to the government's fiscal consolidation efforts.
The government's package of supply-side reforms, launched in 2021 under the Omnibus Law on Job Creation, includes a loosening of labour-market regulation, the revocation of some construction requirements and building permits, a streamlining of business-registration processes and a broadening of sectors open to foreign investment. However, the Constitutional Court has ruled the law unconstitutional and ordered its revision. Despite this, we do not expect material reforms to be reversed, and the revisions will relate primarily to flawed minutiae; the process is likely to be completed before the end of 2022.
Infrastructure development will also be a priority, but progress will fall short of the government's target. The project to relocate the national capital from Jakarta to East Kalimantan is now enshrined in law and will recommence in late 2022. However, the relocation will not be officially completed until at least 2025. Notably, the process will have little impact on pollution and congestion in Jakarta; the city will remain the business centre of Indonesia in the decade ahead. Other major infrastructure projects in the next five years, including the construction of railways, ports, toll roads and coastal barriers (involving land reclamation, to guard against flooding), will be focused mainly on the islands of Java and Sumatra. Several toll roads and the Jakarta-Bandung high speed railway will be finished by 2023, but delays will push the completion of most other projects to the mid-2020s.
The government aims to reduce the number of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), via mergers and privatisation, from 118 in 2020 to 70 by 2024. However, this plan will consistently fall short of the government's target, primarily because of resistance from employees, bureaucratic processes and stakeholders with vested interests. It will nonetheless provide opportu-nities for private-sector expansion.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Government expenditure 16.4 15.7 15.7 15.9 15.6 15.7
Government revenue 10.4 10.9 12.4 13.0 13.0 13.4
Budget balance -6.0 -4.8 -3.3 -2.9 -2.6 -2.3
Government debt 48.0 49.0 46.8 45.0 44.0 43.5
We forecast that the budget deficit will narrow to the equivalent of 4.8% of GDP in 2022, from an estimated 6% of GDP in 2021. The deficit in 2022 will still be wide by historical standards, amid a slow recovery in revenue and an increase in the cost of subsidising fuel, despite the introduction of new levies and tax increases. Tax reforms include the freezing of corporate income tax rates at 22% (rather than a reduction to 20% from 2022, as originally planned); a new higher bracket of 35% for personal income tax; and an increase in the standard rate of value-added tax (VAT) from 10% to 11%. Tax is set to be levied on exported commodity. Further fiscal consolidation will intensify from 2023 and return the deficit below a previously mandated ceiling of 3% of GDP from 2024. The government plans to raise the VAT rate to 12% by 2025.
We forecast public debt to rise in 2022 to 49% of GDP, from 36.3% of GDP in 2019. It will fall gradually in 2023-26 but will remain above 43% of GDP by the end of the period. Notably, this does not include contingent liabilities in the form of SOE debt, which, if included, would skew the figure for 2022 beyond 50% of GDP. However, we believe that the public debt stock is sustainable. This will be assured in part by purchases of government bonds on the primary market by Bank Indonesia (BI, the central bank), which will keep public financing costs low until at least end-2022. Although this form of monetary financing risks jeopardising investor confidence, amid concerns over inflation, our baseline forecast assumes that strong signals towards fiscal consolidation will mitigate this threat. Following this, a recovery in real economic growth will lower the repayment burden.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Lending rate (av) 8.9 9.2 10.3 10.8 11.2 11.3
Deposit rate (av) 3.7 4.6 5.1 5.7 6.2 6.5
BI plans to increase the reserve requirement for commercial banks in three phases, from 3% to 6.5%, between March and September this year. We expect the central bank to complement this with interest-rate rises starting in May, after leaving its policy rate unchanged for most of 2021. Rising inflation in Indonesia and an anticipated moderate slide in the value of the local currency against the US dollar due to monetary policy tightening in the US will be major factors behind the shift in policy. We anticipate two more incremental rises in the third and fourth quarters of 2022, pushing up the seven-day reverse repo policy rate to 4.25% by year-end. There is a risk of a more gradual tightening cycle than we expect if commodity export receipts are more robust (and capital outflows are weaker) than anticipated.
The central bank will slow its tightening cycle from 2024 amid largely tamed inflation and signs of a negative effect on investment. Policy rates will have returned to their end-2019 level by end-2023, and strong domestic demand pressures in 2025-26 mean that a new round of easing is unlikely in our forecast period.
The government and BI have agreed to extend the central bank's purchases of government bonds in the primary market from end-2021 to 2022. However, we expect the central bank to remain independent during the forecast period. Nevertheless, BI's continued financing of the deficit carries a modest risk of stoking inflation and contributing to a decline in the value of the rupiah.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Economic growth (%)
US GDP 5.7 3.4 2.1 1.8 1.8 1.7
OECD GDP 5.2 3.4 2.4 2.0 1.9 1.8
World GDP 5.6 3.4 3.1 2.8 2.7 2.6
World trade 10.2 5.4 4.4 3.9 3.6 3.7
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 4.7 5.2 2.0 2.2 2.2 2.2
OECD CPI 3.6 4.8 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.2
Manufactures (measured in US$) 5.9 0.0 2.3 2.9 2.5 2.2
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 70.4 116.3 95.3 84.0 75.5 67.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 37.8 17.7 -7.3 -20.9 0.2 0.6
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.1 1.0 2.0 2.5 2.5 2.5
¥ 3-month money market rate (av; %) 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Exchange rate: ¥:US$ (av) 109.8 116.5 118.5 118.3 118.1 117.4
Exchange rate: Rp:US$ (av) 14,308 14,897 16,024 15,957 16,333 16,698
Exchange rate: US$:€ (av) 1.18 1.12 1.13 1.18 1.22 1.24
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP 3.7 5.2 4.9 5.0 5.7 5.5
Private consumption 2.0 4.7 4.9 5.7 6.0 6.0
Government consumption 4.0 3.2 2.8 3.6 2.7 3.0
Gross domestic investment 3.8 6.2 5.0 5.3 6.7 5.8
Exports of goods & services 24.0 4.4 4.5 3.8 5.8 5.4
Imports of goods & services 23.2 5.7 3.5 4.7 6.8 5.5
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 -0.1
Agriculture 1.8 3.3 3.2 4.2 4.0 3.8
Industry 3.4 7.3 5.1 5.0 6.2 6.0
Services 3.6 3.9 5.2 5.2 5.7 5.5
We forecast that real GDP will grow by 5.2% in 2022, after expanding by 3.7% in 2021. Household spending will rise strongly in 2022 as consumer sentiment strengthens and covid-19 restrictions remain modest. Nevertheless, unemployment will remain above the pre-pandemic average. Growth in investment spending will be rapid, but this masks disparities between different parts of the economy. Investment in mining and downstream heavy industries will be strong, but outlays by small and medium-sized firms will be weaker because of deleveraging efforts and increased financing costs. Strong external demand for Indonesian commodities will support headline economic growth.
Financial vulnerability resulting from high indebtedness in the wake of the pandemic will weigh more heavily on the economy in 2023-24, owing to domestic policy interest-rate rises in 2022 and 2023. Slowing investment growth will depress headline GDP growth in 2023-24, to an annual average of 4.9%. Adjustment to these less accommodating financial conditions will be short-lived, however, and economic growth will return to a broadly robust rate in 2025-26.
The amended Omnibus Law will have a modest positive impact on private investment in 2022-26; its effect will mainly take the form of increased construction and mining activity. Indonesia will continue to struggle to compete for foreign investment in export-oriented manu-facturing. Pervasive corruption, as well as high wages by regional standards, will remain the main obstacles. In the medium term these factors will weigh on domestic industry's ability to increase the average value added in its manufacturing output.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends The services sector has been the main engine of economic growth in recent years, expanding at an average annual rate of 4% in 2017-21 (including a contraction in 2020 because of the pandemic) and constituting 46.2% of nominal GDP on a factor cost basis in 2021. However, manufacturing will be the fastest growing sector, expanding by an annual average of 5.9% in the next five years. Growing at an average of 5.1%, services will remain Indonesia's next fastest-growing sector in 2022-26, and agriculture will lag behind at 3.7% over the same period. Growth in telecommunications services will be particularly strong. Mobile-phone coverage will be extended and tariffs increasingly affordable, enabling more Indonesians-who are enthusiastic users of social media-to communicate electronically.
Post-pandemic, the tourism sector will emerge as an economic powerhouse The tourism sector will recover gradually in 2022. The reopening of Bali, Bintan and Batam in early 2022 has shown promising results, but relatively strict entry requirements for foreign tourists could hamper the recovery of tourism. However, we still expect Indonesia's tourism to pick up from 2023, when the pandemic is sufficiently contained, China's quarantine measures are relaxed, and travel restrictions-including vaccination certificates-are no longer in place. Some areas of Indonesia are emerging as luxury destinations for high-end tourism and residences for wealthy "digital nomad" expatriates. Deficiencies in Indonesia's transport infrastructure could stunt the sector's potential growth. Furthermore, regional competition for tourism will remain intense. However, the number of visitors from emerging markets elsewhere in Asia will also rise rapidly, given the country's convenient location and tourist attractions.
The performance of the manufacturing sector has been held back by persistent under-investment. The current administration is determined to raise investment into the sector, not only to boost its fortunes but also to reduce the country's dependence on imported products. Indonesia is likely to benefit moderately through manufacturing diversification caused by US-China tensions and rising wages in China. However, its ability to gain more foreign direct investment (FDI) will be hindered by business environment concerns. The authorities hope to formulate a complete supply chain for electric vehicles, as the country has a large reserve of nickel-a raw material of batteries. The government will continue to prioritise improving the environment for manufacturers amid growing demand for better-paid jobs in the formal sector.
The government's efforts will improve the business environment, but we believe that the investment regime will remain flawed and nationalistic. The growing middle class will boost the services sector, which will account for 45.9% of GDP in 2026, up from 46.2% in 2021. The importance of the agricultural sector will continue to decline, but it will remain the largest employer in the forecast period.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Consumer prices 1.6 4.2 3.4 2.2 2.7 2.3
Producer prices 6.3 6.0 0.1 2.0 1.5 1.0
Average nominal wages (av) -1.8 5.2 9.9 9.3 9.5 9.1
Average real wages (av) -3.3 1.0 6.3 6.9 6.6 6.6
We forecast that consumer price inflation will accelerate to 4.2% in 2022, reflecting a further increase in some major global commodity prices, including oil, and firming domestic demand following the lifting of coronavirus-related restrictions. Producer price inflation will also accelerate in line with commodity price surges derived from geopolitical tensions.
Inflation will decelerate in annual average terms in 2023-26 as global commodity prices soften and infrastructure improves, including roads and ports, helping to reduce elevated logistics costs. Interest-rate rises by BI will also ensure that inflation remains in its target band of 2-4% in 2023-26, although sporadic bouts of high inflation are likely to occur.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Exchange rate Rp:US$ (av) 14,308 14,897 16,024 15,957 16,333 16,698
Exchange rate Rp:US$ (end-period) 14,269 15,459 15,936 16,079 16,590 16,790
Exchange rate Rp:¥100 (av) 13,034 12,783 13,527 13,494 13,835 14,223
Real effective exchange-rate index (2010=100; av) 90.0 85.5 80.6 80.3 78.5 76.6
Purchasing power parity Rp:US$ (av) 4,758 4,754 4,761 4,743 4,730 4,730
We forecast that the rupiah will trade at a significantly lower level against the US dollar in 2022. After ending 2021 at about Rp14,300:US$1, the local currency will depreciate in the first half of 2022. Weakening will be driven by liquidity tapering in the US and policy-rate rises. Monetary policy tightening by BI will help to stem some capital outflows, stabilising but not reversing the trend. We expect the exchange rate to stand at Rp15,500:US$1 by the end of 2022.
In 2023-26 monetary policy tightening in Indonesia that is broadly in line with the US will prevent another bout of sharp depreciation. Nonetheless, Indonesia's gradually widening current-account deficit and higher inflation than in countries that issue reserve currencies will result in persistent moderate nominal depreciation of the rupiah in 2023-26. We forecast that the exchange rate will average nearly Rp17,000:US$1 in 2026.
The local currency will experience heightened volatility on occasion, which will prompt intervention by BI. However, we do not expect the monetary authority to hold back movements for prolonged periods, owing partly to the economy's continuing dependence on foreign speculative capital flows.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Current-account balance 3.3 6.3 -4.5 -10.2 -17.3 -17.9
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.3 0.5 -0.4 -0.8 -1.2 -1.2
Goods: exports fob 232.8 266.4 261.6 265.6 280.6 299.3
Goods: imports fob -189.0 -216.7 -221.0 -230.0 -250.7 -271.0
Trade balance 43.8 49.7 40.5 35.6 29.9 28.3
Services: credit 14.0 17.0 20.3 24.9 28.3 31.0
Services: debit -28.8 -33.4 -38.3 -41.6 -45.0 -47.2
Services: balance -14.8 -16.3 -17.9 -16.7 -16.6 -16.2
Primary income: credit 6.7 7.8 9.5 10.7 11.9 13.1
Primary income: debit -38.7 -41.7 -43.7 -47.2 -51.0 -54.1
Primary income balance -32.0 -33.9 -34.3 -36.5 -39.1 -41.0
Secondary income: credit 10.8 11.8 12.4 12.7 14.1 17.1
Secondary income: debit -4.5 -4.9 -5.3 -5.3 -5.6 -6.0
Secondary income balance 6.3 6.9 7.1 7.4 8.5 11.1
We forecast that Indonesia's goods trade surplus will expand in 2022, as strong global commodity prices will push up exports receipts, outpacing increases in import bill owing to strengthening domestic demand. The services deficit will remain sizeable amid only a partial recovery of inbound tourism. Taking into account a diminished secondary income surplus, we expect the overall current-account surplus to expand to the equivalent of 0.5% of GDP in 2022, from 0.3% in 2021.
The current-account balance is forecast to slip into deficit equivalent to more than 1% of GDP over the medium term, although this is small by historical standards. Primary income debits, mainly in the form of repatriated profits, will be the main driver of this trend, while the shortfall will be contained by a narrowing services deficit, as tourism resumes, and declining global oil prices. The implementation of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, a mega-regional trade deal, will have little impact on Indonesian trade, mainly owing to the country's limited integration into the region's more complex manufacturing trade-production network.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Indonesia Stocks and flows Attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) into Indonesia has been the administration's priority. FDI inflows have nevertheless been subject to disruptions, owing to the government's inability to implement reforms rapidly. When the president, Joko Widodo (known as Jokowi), took office in 2014, the country received US$25.1bn in FDI inflows. The amount tumbled to US$4.5bn in 2016. In 2021 inflows stood at US$20.5bn-a rise from US$19.2bn in 2020. EIU estimates that the stock of inward FDI reached US$332.1bn in 2021, equivalent to 28% of GDP in that year. FDI inflows are forecast to grow in 2022, but they will not return to 2019 levels until 2023.
Origin and distribution Indonesia's largest source of FDI remains its more affluent partners in Asia. In 2021 Singapore, Japan, China and Hong Kong were the most significant sources of FDI, according to data from Indonesia's Investment Co-ordinating Board (BKPM). In particular, Chinese investment into Indonesia's infrastructure sector has been rising rapidly. Indonesia falls within China's Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) and has been a beneficiary of loans from the Chinese-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB). In 2021 the metal sector was the largest beneficiary of foreign investment, followed by mining. The natural resources subsector, which is subject to heavy regulation and protectionism, is becoming less attractive to foreign investors. The government has been promoting infrastructure and manufacturing to foreign investors, in a bid to diversify the economy away from natural resources.
Determinants Historically, Indonesia's protectionist reputation has deterred foreign investors. Heavy-handed regulation, red tape and land-acquisition issues have made the business environment especially challenging. Addressing much of this has been the focus of Jokowi's administration since it took charge in 2014. The government has managed to make some progress: early in its term, the BKPM launched a one-stop licensing platform. Shortly after that, Jokowi released 15 reform packages to deregulate various sectors. The Omnibus Law on Job Creation, passed in 2020, has improved Indonesia's business environment moderately. A new "negative investment list" released in February 2021 has liberalised many sectors to foreign investment. However, institutional weakness persists, undermining the business environment. The legal system lacks transparency, tends to favour the political elite, and sometimes appears to discriminate against foreign interests; this is particularly the case in the natural resources subsector. Labour laws remain inflexible, and disproportionately large rises in minimal wages are still likely to be implemented. Finally, security threats, particularly of terrorist attacks, remain a persistent cause for concern for foreign investors. The Indonesian authorities have proven to be capable of containing such threats, but low-level attacks in major cities and tourist destinations, including the capital, Jakarta, have still occurred in recent years.
Impact FDI is often controversial in Indonesia. Mining firms, in particular, are criticised frequently and have been taken to court for breaking environmental and other laws. A restriction against exporting raw mineral ores that was installed in 2014 became a point of contention for many large foreign mining companies and the government. The law attempts to encourage mining companies to build processing and smelting facilities in Indonesia, in order to raise the value of the commodities being exported. Consequently, there has been a sizeable gap between the value of FDI projects receiving approval and the number and size of projects that are actually implemented. The trend has been particularly marked in the case of larger, capital-intensive projects, many of which have been postponed or delayed indefinitely. In recent years more manufacturing FDI has materialised; this has created jobs in the more-developed West Java region. The authorities will attempt to attract more FDI to the less-developed Central Java with improved infrastructure.
Potential With a steadily growing economy and a large middle-class population, Indonesia offers significant investment opportunities for businesses, beyond the traditional natural resources sector, which has driven investment to date. With the government focused on improving the business environment, the new reform could lead to healthy FDI growth. Jokowi also managed to gain enough political capital to place technocratic ministers in crucial economic portfolios. The finance minister, Sri Mulyani Indrawati, a former director at the World Bank, has been instrumental in boosting investor sentiment by ensuring prudent fiscal policy before the pandemic. However, many regulatory and business environmental issues remain unaddressed, and we expect this to frustrate the government's goal of making Indonesia an export manufacturing hub. That said, a huge domestic market is more than adequate to attract more FDI into Indonesia in 2022-26.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2016 2021 2026
Population (m)
Total 258.2 269.8 280.6
 Male 130.0 135.8 141.1
 Female 128.2 134.0 139.5
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 27.1 25.1 22.9
 15-64 66.7 67.7 68.6
 65+ 6.2 7.2 8.5
Young-age dependency ratio 0.41 0.37 0.33
Old-age dependency ratio 0.09 0.11 0.12
Working-age population (m) 172.2 182.7 192.4
Urbanisation (% of total) 54.0 57.3 60.9
Labour force (m) 125.4 140.2 146.9
       
Period averages   2017-21 2022-26
Population growth (%)   0.9 0.8
Working-age population growth (%)   1.2 1.0
Labour force growth (%)   2.2 0.9
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   18.6 17.1
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   6.5 6.7
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   21.1 18.9
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   69.0 70.0
 Female   73.3 74.4
 Average   71.1 72.1
Sources: US Bureau of Census; International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; EIU estimates and forecasts; National statistics.
A young population will ensure that the labour force remains dynamic EIU expects Indonesia's demographics to remain favourable in the forecast period (2022-26). The population will grow at a healthy rate of 0.8% per year on average over this period, and Indonesia will therefore remain as the most populous country in the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN): at 269.8m in 2021, Indonesia's population constituted approximately 40% of the ASEAN total. Over the forecast period the population will remain fairly young, with the labour force rising to 146.9m by the end of 2026, from 140.2m in 2021. Research conducted by the OECD in 2017 suggests that, in the medium term, Indonesia will be one of the countries in ASEAN that is least affected by ageing, based on the projection that for each person aged 65 and above, there will be at least 4.3 adults in the working-age population.
The results of Indonesia's last census, undertaken in 2020, showed a continued slowdown in the population growth rate over the previous decade, suggesting that the government's much-vaunted family-planning programme has had some success. A gradual slowdown in the population growth will prove positive in the medium term for standards of living, as it will push up GDP per head more rapidly. Meanwhile higher life expectancy, a falling birth rate and a stable death rate will reinforce the steady ageing of the population. On the other hand, the gender ratio continues to worsen, with the male/female ratio reaching 102:100 (Papua province has the largest gap at 114:100), boding poorly for social stability.
The 2020 census also showed that population distribution and growth rates varied markedly across provinces. The population of resource-rich Kalimantan, which grew most rapidly in 2001-20, continues to expand apace, and-given the burgeoning labour requirements of palm oil plantations-migration to this region will remain strong over the forecast period. However, Java showed a relative decline in population, with 56.1% of Indonesians living in the region in 2020, from 57.4% in 2010. Regional imbalances in the distribution of the country's population will persist in the longer term, owing to uneven economic opportunities.
The population imbalance is also representative of the economic divide between provinces of Indonesia. The ongoing decentralisation process appears to be encouraging settlement outside Java, particularly in the resource-rich provinces of Papua, Kalimantan, Aceh and Riau, where many Indonesians have migrated in search of jobs (as these provinces attract the highest inflows of investment). The relocation of the national capital to East Kalimantan province will encourage further migration into the region. The construction of the new capital will include offices and homes for 1.5 million civil servants, with the first wave of personnel arriving by August 2024.
There is a large income gap between resource-rich and -poor provinces, and little progress has been made to bridge this divide in recent years. In 2021 East Kalimantan (the province with the highest GDP per head after Jakarta, the capital) was 9.7 times richer than East Nusa Tenggara (the province with the lowest GDP per head), although this gap has narrowed since 2010 when the gap was 12.6 times. The Human Development Report 2020, published by the UN Development Programme (UNDP), ranked Indonesia 107th out of 189 countries in terms of human development indicators. The authorities have improved living and education standards, but there remains significant scope for further progress. Poverty rates were on a declining trend before the onset of the pandemic in 2020. After two quarters of rising poverty rates, the poverty rate plateaued at 10.1% in March 2021, before falling to 9.7% in September.
Indonesians will live longer, healthier lives but will trail their regional peers Many of the country's health indicators have registered vast improvements in the past 30 years. However, average life expectancy-at 71.6 years in 2021-remains low by regional standards, and will remain so, despite rising to a projected 72.5 years in 2026. The infant mortality rate is high, at an estimated 20.2 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2021, despite having fallen markedly from 32.2 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2007. It is forecast to fall further, to 18.1 by 2026. Indonesia's healthcare spending as a proportion of GDP has been rising, despite a dip in 2008. An ambitious healthcare reform introduced in 2014, which aims to achieve universal health insurance, will help to fuel this growth. The government launched a campaign in January 2021 to reduce the fertility rate to 2.1 children per woman by 2025, while simultaneously improving other factors including health, education and employment. We expect the government to miss its target fertility rate owing to the prevailing high rates outside urbanised provinces on Java island, but it will continue to expand the public healthcare system over the forecast period albeit with incremental improvements.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Population (m) 269.8 272.0 274.2 276.4 278.5 280.6
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,186.1 1,251.3 1,252.0 1,348.2 1,419.4 1,497.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 4,396 4,600 4,566 4,878 5,097 5,335
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 3,566.8 3,920.8 4,214 4,536 4,901 5,284
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 13,221 14,414 15,368 16,412 17,597 18,831
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 769.8 808.3 820.0 889.7 938.8 989.0
Household consumption (US$ bn) 659.7 695.1 706.9 767.0 809.3 852.6
Household consumption per head (US$) 2,450 2,560 2,580 2,780 2,910 3,040
Exports of goods & services (% change) 24.0 4.4 4.5 3.8 5.8 5.4
Imports of goods & services (% change) 23.2 5.7 3.5 4.7 6.8 5.5
Indonesians will have more purchasing power with pro-business reforms Indonesia's sizeable and upwardly mobile population makes it an attractive market for a variety of sectors. With a population of 269.8m in 2021, Indonesia hosts the largest market in South-east Asia. Aside from a recession in 2020, the country will retain its position as one of the fastest-growing economies in the region in 2022-26 and is expected to maintain a pro-business stance throughout the forecast period, making it a good prospect for new investment. The vast majority of Indonesians earn low incomes, with GDP per head standing at US$4,396 at market exchange rates in 2021-one of the lower levels in the region. EIU expects GDP per head to rise to US$5,335 by 2026 on the back of a sustained recovery from the coronavirus shock in 2020.
Indonesia's economy is consumption-driven. We forecast that retail sales will rise significantly in the latter half of the forecast period. However, the growing disposable incomes of the general population and the presence of an aspirational young population will eventually boost discretionary spending.
It should be noted that consumption patterns in Indonesia remain concentrated on low-priced goods, rather than luxury or branded items, owing to relatively low income levels across the country. Foreign retailers are present in numbers but they have had to focus on lower-cost products and services to suit local tastes. The retail market remains dominated by informal vending, particularly in peripheral provinces. However, the country's sizeable middle class and large urban population are increasingly demanding higher-value non-durable and luxury goods, many of which are imported. In 2022-26 the income divide between the more urbanised and faster-developing provinces, such as West Java, and others that are more dependent on the primary sector, such as provinces in the Sulawesi and Kalimantan regions, will remain wide. Therefore, market opportunities will differ accordingly.
With relatively extensive and rapidly deepening broadband penetration and the popularity of smartphones and social media, Indonesia offers huge potential for e-commerce. Nevertheless, the relative weakness of payment and delivery systems means that such services will remain highly concentrated in the larger metropolitan areas of Jakarta (the capital), Surabaya and Medan in the early part of the forecast period, but the market potential remains substantial. Jakarta is one of the top five cities in the world in terms of the number of social media users. Smartphone penetration, particularly in the large metropolises, has allowed many service providers to thrive on the e-commerce platform. Consumer lending through e-commerce platforms is also building momentum, partly because of an encouraging regulatory environment provided by the Financial Services Authority (OJK). Ride-hailing and delivery services such as Gojek (a motorcycle taxi and delivery app) and Grab (a Singapore-based taxi-hailing app) have been thriving owing to the poor supply of public transport facilities in dense urban areas. A local e-commerce giant, Tokopedia, has grown markedly. Shopee and Lazada (both of Singapore) have also been successful in the market.
Advancements in financial technology will drive consumer spending Digital wallet providers gained significant momentum in recent years. Movement restrictions during the pandemic had expanded the reach of digital transactions, as consumers shifted from in-store to online payments. Bank Indonesia (the central bank) projects digital transactions to reach Rp48 quadrillion (US$3.3trn) in 2022. Global technology investors are looking into the market for its favourable demographic and rising economies; this is especially the case for Chinese investors, who have found that their way to invest in India has been jeopardised by restrictions that require all Chinese-origin foreign direct investment to be reviewed and approved by the government.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 261,248 273,814 276,060 299,778 315,372 328,419
Housing & household fuels 158,949 166,293 168,623 184,664 196,605 207,258
Clothing & footwear 43,931 45,346 45,288 49,083 51,364 53,151
Health 27,272 28,694 28,170 29,901 30,877 31,568
Transport & communications 115,377 121,960 124,401 138,330 149,338 159,473
Leisure & education 52,888 55,394 56,127 61,680 65,786 69,431
Total 659,665 691,502 698,669 763,437 809,342 849,301
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 39.6 39.6 39.5 39.3 39.0 38.7
Housing & household fuels 24.1 24.0 24.1 24.2 24.3 24.4
Clothing & footwear 6.7 6.6 6.5 6.4 6.3 6.3
Health 4.1 4.1 4.0 3.9 3.8 3.7
Transport & communications 17.5 17.6 17.8 18.1 18.5 18.8
Leisure & education 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.1 8.1 8.2
Rising urbanisation will bolster retail sales in the post-pandemic economy As vaccination rates rise, coupled with the relaxation of movement restrictions across the country, a sustained recovery will help to boost retail revenue in 2022. With travel curbs being eased across the Asia-Pacific region, the revival of the tourism industry will further invigorate the retail and services sectors. We forecast that the share of spending on food will decrease in the forecast period, with more spending being allocated to housing, transport and communications. Indonesia also has the world's largest Muslim population, which will sustain substantial demand for halal products in the food and healthcare sectors. Therefore, urban areas, which accommodate more than half of the population, have become the focus of most retail activities.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2021   2026  
  Indonesia Asia & Australasia (av) Indonesia Asia & Australasia (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 3.2 6.4 3.0 6.3
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 142 575 160 718
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 20.2 20.2 18.1 19.3
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 0.5 1.4 0.5 1.5
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 39.6 26.0 38.7 26.3
Meat consumption (kg per person) 15.7 35.9 18.0 36.3
Milk consumption (litres per person) 17.1 73.4 19.1 82.6
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 0.7 1.3 0.7 1.4
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 68 110 73 121
Telephone main lines 33 89 32 72
Mobile phone subscribers 1,380 1,110 1,470 1,170
Television sets 565 708 772 896
Personal computers 191 394 201 423
Households
No. of households (m) 72 992 77 1,052
No. of people per household (av) 3.7 3.8 3.6 3.7
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 7,730 13,320 9,250 16,490
Average monthly wage (US$) 201 990 256 n/a
Gini index 35.6 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); EIU estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2022-30 2031-50 2022-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population 0.80 0.50 0.60
Working-age population 0.86 0.28 0.46
Working-age minus total population -0.03 -0.22 -0.16
Labour force 1.12 0.50 0.69
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 4.1 3.2 3.5
Growth of real GDP 4.9 3.7 4.1
Labour productivity growth 2.9 3.2 3.1
Growth of capital stock 5.0 4.3 4.5
Total factor productivity growth 2.0 1.9 1.9
Initial conditions: Indonesia is the largest economy in the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), but GDP per head remains relatively low, at US$4,396 at market exchange rates in 2021. The years immediately following the fall of Suharto in 1998 were characterised by political instability, which deterred investors and delayed Indonesia's recovery from the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis. In 2004 Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono was elected president. During his decade-long term (he was re-elected in 2009) he established relative political stability. The country now has a reformist government, led by the president, Joko Widodo (known as Jokowi), who has overseen improvements to business environment and attracted foreign direct investment (FDI) to finance much-needed infrastructure development. The public finances are now relatively healthy, despite measures taken to cushion the adverse effects of the coronavirus pandemic. However, corruption is still endemic, despite the fact that official attempts to reduce graft have made progress. The judicial system is weak, easily manipulated by the political and business elite, and sometimes perceived as discriminating against foreign interests.
Demographic trends: Indonesia's population will grow by an annual average of 0.6% in 2022-50. The country will benefit from the demographic dividend in the short to medium term as the working-age population continues to grow and is becoming more educated. However, towards the end of the forecast period, a falling birth rate and increases in the senior population will present challenges for social policies and healthcare infrastructure. Urbanisation will continue; such expansion will increase the pressure on urban infrastructure, which remains inadequate to meet the needs of the population.
External conditions: Despite tensions between the US and China, EIU believes that trade proliferation will be a defining long-term feature in South-east Asia. Indonesia's external sector will benefit from the single-market ASEAN Economic Community and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (a multilateral trade pact). Indonesia will enjoy wider market access to more affluent economies. To tap into this trend, Indonesia will depend on the ability of successive governments to move away from trade protectionism, improve the business operating environment and develop infrastructure. These changes will take time to materialise. The size of the domestic market and the wealth of natural resources will continue to attract foreign investors, which will ensure healthy levels of exports and investment growth in the decades ahead. As trade negotiations develop, Indonesia will benefit from its geographic position, given its location at the heart of the trade routes of Asia and Australasia. Such initiatives will also require successive presidents of Indonesia to adopt a prominent lead in the regions and if they do so, Indonesia will deepen its role in regional supply chains.
Institutions and policy trends: Indonesia's democratic processes will become more entrenched in the long term. Civil society will be more active amid rising literacy; as a result, successive governments will be under pressure to improve the political environment and eradicate corruption. As the largest economy in ASEAN, Indonesia will become an important player on the global stage and is likely to play a leading role in the functioning of ASEAN. Therefore, it will have a more prominent role in international organisations. Given Indonesia's non-aligned tradition, we expect that foreign policy will continue to be neutral, even amid growing conflict between the US and China. Indonesia's relationship with both countries is expected to be generally cordial. The country is also likely to actively advocate against the pressure of "choosing sides" between the US and China.
Long-term performance: Indonesia's large consumer market will lead to an economic shift from exports of raw commodities towards more manufacturing- and services-oriented growth, although the commodities sectors will remain important. Successive governments will not only need to continue with the current administration's focus on improving the business environment, but also invest in human development factors, especially education and healthcare, to ensure sustainable long-term expansion. The country's demographic dividend and growing market opportunities will remain attractive to foreign investors. With its vulnerable geographic and climatic position, Indonesia will have to brace for the impact of global climate change on its long-term economic performance. It will be susceptible to intensified geopolitical competition, but the sheer size of the economy and flexible non-alignment make it less prone to this risk than many of its regional peers and exercise more leadership in the region.
Income and market size
  2021 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 269.8 289.9 320.6
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,186.1 2,028.1 8,565.2
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 4,400 7,000 26,720
Private consumption (US$ bn) 659.7 1,117.5 4,589.8
Private consumption per head (US$) 2,450 3,850 14,320
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 3,566.8 6,860.3 21,143.8
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 13,220 23,670 65,950
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 255.1 459.5 1,729.5
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 223.4 398.0 1,259.9
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 19.1 24.4 35.8
Share of world population (%) 3.5 3.5 3.5
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 1.3 1.4 2.2
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 2.5 3.0 3.9
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 0.9 1.1 1.4
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability Indonesia has the second most bio-diverse ecosystem in the world after Brazil. As a result, changes to its environment affect regional weather patterns and raise risks of natural disasters. The country's archipelagic geography and extensive low-lying areas make its rural areas vulnerable to rising sea levels and global warming. According to the World Resources Institute (WRI), Indonesia is the eighth-largest greenhouse-gas emitter in the world in 2018. The country is a signatory of the Paris Agreement, and according to the Nationally Determined Contributions that it submitted to the UN in 2021, the country aims to reduce its carbon emissions by 29% than a business-as-usual scenario in 2030, and by 41% if it is provided with international financial assistance. The country has pledged to achieve carbon neutrality in 2060. Two factors that will continue to determine emissions levels in Indonesia will be land use and energy sourcing. The country primarily uses coal-fired furnaces for electricity generation. The current government will continue to push for alternative fuels and renewable energy to account for a larger portion of Indonesia's energy mix. More adoption of hydropower and natural gas power plant will allow Indonesia to meet its energy demand while phasing out coal-fired power plant.
In the mid-2000s expansive forest clearing for the cultivation of palm oil led to severe deterioration of Indonesia's peat lands-a big source of carbon when burnt. In 2015 severe and widespread forest fires due to peat land clearing created an international pollution crisis. A moratorium for a new palm oil plantation has been removed in 2021, creating space for further deforestation. However, the authorities aim to reduce carbon emissions from the forestry sector to offset for emissions in the development of manufacturing. Environment regulations in other parts of the world, such as the EU, might force the authorities to attempt to reduce environmentally-unfriendly exports. EIU expects the primacy of coal and palm oil exports to decline from mid-2030 onwards. In 2019 we developed a model to calculate the impact of climate change on long-term growth, and it finds that the Indonesian economy will be 2.8% smaller in 2050 than it would have been without this hit to growth.
Technological developments In April 2018 the president, Joko Widodo (known as Jokowi), officially launched a roadmap covering the period to 2030 for "Industry 4.0"-defined as the use of fourth-generation (4G) technology in manufacturing and industry. The president's plans are ambitious, given Indonesia's still-weak infrastructure and relatively nascent technological use in manufacturing; many traditional industries that are labour-intensive have resisted automation for decades, for fear of job losses and labour-union-provoked instability. Therefore, the Jokowi administration's plans focus on propelling Indonesia's export sector from low to high value through technological transformation and attracting foreign investment on technology-heavy industries. However, according to the World Bank, research and development expenditure as a share of GDP, at just 0.2% in 2018 (latest data available), was below the 2% average of East Asia and the Pacific (excluding high-income countries). We expect expenditure to rise in 2022-50, but it will remain below the average. As the trend continues technological improvement will partly offset the damage done by an ageing population.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 3.2 3.0 2.3 -3.7 5.6 3.4 3.1 2.8 2.7 2.6
US GDP growth 2.3 2.9 2.3 -3.4 5.7 3.4 2.1 1.8 1.8 1.7
Japan GDP growth 1.7 0.6 -0.2 -4.5 1.7 2.9 1.3 1.5 1.2 1.1
Asia & Australasia growth 4.8 4.4 3.6 -1.5 5.8 4.6 3.9 3.9 3.8 3.7
World trade growth 5.6 3.8 0.3 -4.9 10.2 5.4 4.4 3.9 3.6 3.7
US CPI 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.7 5.2 2.0 2.2 2.2 2.2
Japan CPI 0.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 -0.2 1.2 0.9 0.7 0.9 0.8
Manufactures export price 2.0 5.1 -1.5 0.8 5.9 0.0 2.3 2.9 2.5 2.2
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 70.4 116.3 95.3 84.0 75.5 67.5
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 1.0 2.0 2.5 2.5 2.5
¥:US$ (av) 112.1 110.4 109.0 106.8 109.8 116.5 118.5 118.3 118.1 117.4
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 130.2 133.6 138.9 143.4 145.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Expenditure on GDP (Rp trn at current market prices)
GDP 13,587 14,836 15,832 15,444 16,970 18,640 20,063 21,514 23,183 24,997
Private consumption 7,781 8,449 9,163 9,096 9,439 10,354 11,327 12,239 13,218 14,236
Government consumption 1,237 1,333 1,396 1,470 1,544 1,663 1,759 1,863 1,963 2,067
Gross fixed investment 4,365 4,786 5,119 4,897 5,227 5,662 6,064 6,513 7,158 7,838
Exports of goods & services 2,737 3,112 2,943 2,664 3,650 4,370 4,684 4,832 5,265 5,730
Imports of goods & services 2,599 3,269 3,016 2,428 3,197 3,662 4,025 4,212 4,670 5,122
Stockbuilding 214 341 228 100 113 115 115 140 110 110
Domestic demand 13,597 14,910 15,906 15,562 16,323 17,794 19,266 20,756 22,449 24,251
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 1,015.4 1,042.1 1,119.0 1,059.1 1,186.1 1,251.3 1,252.0 1,348.2 1,419.4 1,497.0
Private consumption 581.5 593.5 647.7 623.7 659.7 695.1 706.9 767.0 809.3 852.6
Government consumption 92.4 93.6 98.7 100.8 107.9 111.6 109.8 116.8 120.2 123.8
Gross fixed investment 326.2 336.2 361.8 335.8 365.3 380.1 378.4 408.2 438.3 469.4
Exports of goods & services 204.5 218.6 208.0 182.7 255.1 293.4 292.3 302.8 322.3 343.1
Imports of goods & services 194.2 229.6 213.2 166.5 223.4 245.8 251.2 264.0 285.9 306.8
Stockbuilding 16.0 24.0 16.1 6.8 7.9 7.7 7.2 8.8 6.7 6.6
Domestic demand 1,016.1 1,047.3 1,124.3 1,067.2 1,140.8 1,194.5 1,202.3 1,300.7 1,374.5 1,452.4
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 57.3 57.0 57.9 58.9 55.6 55.5 56.5 56.9 57.0 57.0
Government consumption 9.1 9.0 8.8 9.5 9.1 8.9 8.8 8.7 8.5 8.3
Gross fixed investment 32.1 32.3 32.3 31.7 30.8 30.4 30.2 30.3 30.9 31.4
Stockbuilding 1.6 2.3 1.4 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.5 0.4
Exports of goods & services 20.1 21.0 18.6 17.3 21.5 23.4 23.3 22.5 22.7 22.9
Imports of goods & services 19.1 22.0 19.1 15.7 18.8 19.6 20.1 19.6 20.1 20.5
Memorandum items
Oil production ('000 b/d) 874 889 c 911 c 908 c 848 c 838 823 803 788 773
National savings ratio (%) 32.1 31.6 31.1 31.9 31.7 31.5 30.4 30.2 30.1 30.6
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Real expenditure on GDP (Rp trn at constant 2010 prices)
GDP 9,910 10,423 10,946 10,725 11,118 11,695 12,263 12,878 13,615 14,364
Private consumption 5,490 5,770 6,066 5,906 6,026 6,310 6,621 6,997 7,416 7,857
Government consumption 790 827 856 872 907 936 962 997 1,024 1,054
Gross fixed investment 3,226 3,442 3,597 3,420 3,550 3,770 3,958 4,168 4,447 4,705
Exports of goods & services 2,145 2,285 2,274 2,090 2,591 2,705 2,825 2,932 3,102 3,271
Imports of goods & services 1,961 2,202 2,046 1,705 2,101 2,220 2,298 2,406 2,569 2,710
Stockbuilding (% of GDP) 127 198 130 52 63 80 80 80 95 85
Domestic demand 9,633 10,237 10,650 10,250 10,546 11,096 11,621 12,242 12,982 13,702
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 5.1 5.2 5.0 -2.0 3.7 5.2 4.9 5.0 5.7 5.5
Private consumption 5.0 5.1 5.1 -2.6 2.0 4.7 4.9 5.7 6.0 6.0
Government consumption 1.9 4.6 3.6 1.9 4.0 3.2 2.8 3.6 2.7 3.0
Gross fixed investment 6.1 6.7 4.5 -4.9 3.8 6.2 5.0 5.3 6.7 5.8
Exports of goods & services 8.8 6.5 -0.5 -8.1 24.0 4.4 4.5 3.8 5.8 5.4
Imports of goods & services 7.9 12.3 -7.1 -16.7 23.2 5.7 3.5 4.7 6.8 5.5
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -0.1 0.7 -0.7 -0.7 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 -0.1
Domestic demand 4.9 6.3 4.0 -3.7 2.9 5.2 4.7 5.3 6.0 5.5
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 2.7 2.8 2.8 -1.5 1.1 2.6 2.7 3.1 3.3 3.2
Government consumption 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.2
Gross fixed investment 2.0 2.2 1.5 -1.6 1.2 2.0 1.6 1.7 2.2 1.9
External balance 0.3 -1.0 1.4 1.4 1.0 -0.1 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.2
Memorandum items
Real personal disposable income (% change) 5.0 c 5.1 c 5.1 c -1.8 c 1.8 c 4.4 4.6 5.7 6.0 6.0
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Origin of GDP (Rp trn at constant 2010 prices)
GDP at factor cost 9,531 10,003 10,499 10,332 10,669 11,223 11,768 12,358 13,065 13,784
Agriculture 1,258 1,307 1,354 1,378 1,404 1,450 1,495 1,559 1,621 1,683
Industry 3,981 4,153 4,312 4,191 4,334 4,649 4,884 5,130 5,449 5,776
Services 4,292 4,542 4,832 4,762 4,931 5,125 5,389 5,670 5,995 6,325
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 3.9 3.9 3.6 1.8 1.8 3.3 3.2 4.2 4.0 3.8
Industry 4.1 4.3 3.8 -2.8 3.4 7.3 5.1 5.0 6.2 6.0
Services 5.7 5.8 6.4 -1.5 3.6 3.9 5.2 5.2 5.7 5.5
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 13.2 13.1 12.9 13.3 13.2 c 12.9 12.7 12.6 12.4 12.2
Industry 41.8 41.5 41.1 40.6 40.6 c 41.4 41.5 41.5 41.7 41.9
Services 45.0 45.4 46.0 46.1 46.2 c 45.7 45.8 45.9 45.9 45.9
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) 4.7 4.0 4.0 -10.1 c 2.4 c 6.4 5.8 5.9 6.1 5.9
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 2.8 0.8 3.0 -1.8 1.6 1.9 1.8 2.5 3.9 3.5
Total factor productivity growth 1.6 0.3 1.7 -3.4 0.8 1.7 1.3 1.8 2.8 2.5
Growth of capital stock 5.8 5.9 5.7 4.5 4.3 4.6 4.6 4.7 4.9 5.0
Growth of potential GDP 5.0 5.0 5.0 -0.7 3.3 4.1 3.6 3.9 5.2 4.7
Growth of real GDP 5.1 5.2 5.0 -2.0 3.7 5.2 4.9 5.0 5.7 5.5
Growth of real GDP per head 4.1 4.2 4.1 -2.9 2.8 4.3 4.0 4.2 4.9 4.7
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 260.6 262.9 265.3 267.5 269.8 272.0 274.2 276.4 278.5 280.6
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,015.4 1,042.1 1,119.0 1,059.1 1,186.1 1,251.3 1,252.0 1,348.2 1,419.4 1,497.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 3,900 3,960 4,220 3,960 4,400 4,600 4,570 4,880 5,100 5,330
Private consumption (US$ m) 581.5 593.5 647.7 623.7 659.7 695.1 706.9 767.0 809.3 852.6
Private consumption per head (US$) 2,230 2,260 2,440 2,330 2,450 2,560 2,580 2,780 2,910 3,040
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2,894 3,116 3,332 3,304 3,567 3,921 4,214 4,536 4,901 5,284
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 11,100 11,850 12,560 12,350 13,220 14,410 15,370 16,410 17,600 18,830
Personal disposable income (Rp trn) 9,026 c 9,801 c 10,629 c 10,642 c 11,015 12,042 13,140 14,198 15,333 16,514
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 674.6 c 688.4 c 751.3 c 729.8 c 769.8 808.3 820.0 889.7 938.8 989.0
Growth of real disposable income (%) 5.0 c 5.1 c 5.1 c -1.8 c 1.8 c 4.4 4.6 5.7 6.0 6.0
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 3.48 3.48 3.48 3.48 3.48 3.48 3.51 3.53 3.56 3.47
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 1.26 1.22 1.29 1.26 1.26 1.27 1.20 1.22 1.22 1.24
Share of world GDP at PPP (%) 2.41 2.44 2.50 2.52 2.49 2.52 2.55 2.60 2.66 2.78
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.97 0.95 0.91 0.96 1.06 1.14 1.08 1.05 1.05 1.11
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 14.8 14.9 14.6 16.8 16.4 15.7 15.7 15.9 15.6 15.7
Interest 1.6 1.7 1.7 2.0 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.3 2.4
Non-interest 13.2 13.2 12.8 14.8 14.9 13.9 13.7 13.7 13.3 13.3
Government revenue 12.3 13.1 12.4 10.7 10.4 10.9 12.4 13.0 13.0 13.4
Budget balance -2.5 -1.8 -2.2 -6.1 -6.0 -4.8 -3.3 -2.9 -2.6 -2.3
Primary balance -0.9 -0.1 -0.5 -4.1 -4.5 -3.0 -1.3 -0.7 -0.3 0.1
Government debt 33.4 33.9 36.3 44.3 48.0 49.0 46.8 45.0 44.0 43.5
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate Rp:US$ (av) 13,381 14,237 14,148 14,582 14,308 14,897 16,024 15,957 16,333 16,698
Exchange rate Rp:US$ (year-end) 13,548 14,481 13,901 14,105 14,269 15,459 15,936 16,079 16,590 16,790
Exchange rate Rp:¥100 (av) 11,933 12,892 12,976 13,658 13,034 12,783 13,527 13,494 13,835 14,223
Exchange rate Rp:¥100 (year-end) 12,022 13,201 12,792 13,669 12,390 13,494 13,045 12,589 12,259 11,942
Real effective exchange-rate index, CPI-based (2010=100; av) 94.9 89.1 92.9 91.3 90.0 85.5 80.6 80.3 78.5 76.6
Purchasing power parity Rp:US$ (av) 4,696 4,761 4,752 4,675 4,758 4,754 4,761 4,743 4,730 4,730
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 8.3 6.3 6.5 12.5 13.9 8.9 8.8 6.5 6.8 7.1
Domestic credit growth (%) 7.1 11.0 6.4 12.8 12.4 8.2 8.0 5.9 6.8 6.8
Lending interest rate (av; %) 11.1 10.5 10.4 9.5 8.9 9.2 10.3 10.8 11.2 11.3
Deposit rate (av; %) 6.5 6.1 6.7 5.5 3.7 4.6 5.1 5.7 6.2 6.5
Money market rate (av; %) 6.3 6.6 6.6 4.7 3.8 4.3 5.3 5.8 6.2 6.4
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market
Labour force (m) 128.1 133.4 135.9 138.2 140.2 141.9 143.5 144.5 145.9 146.9
Labour force (% change) 2.1 4.1 1.9 1.7 1.4 1.3 1.1 0.8 1.0 0.7
Unemployment rate (%) 5.5 5.3 5.2 7.1 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.4 4.7 4.5
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
Consumer prices (av) 3.8 3.3 2.8 2.0 1.6 4.2 3.4 2.2 2.7 2.3
Consumer prices (year-end) 3.6 3.2 2.6 1.7 1.8 3.7 3.7 3.1 2.9 2.9
Producer prices (av) 4.6 5.4 1.0 1.0 c 6.3 c 6.0 0.1 2.0 1.5 1.0
GDP deflator (av) 4.3 3.8 1.6 -0.4 6.0 4.4 2.6 2.1 1.9 2.2
Private consumption deflator (av) 3.4 3.3 3.1 2.0 1.7 4.8 4.3 2.2 1.9 1.6
Government consumption deflator (av) 2.8 3.0 1.1 3.4 1.0 4.4 2.9 2.2 2.6 2.2
Fixed investment deflator (av) 1.9 2.8 2.3 0.6 2.8 2.0 2.0 2.0 3.0 3.5
Average nominal wages (av) 14.4 c 1.6 c 4.7 c -1.2 -1.8 5.2 9.9 9.3 9.5 9.1
Average real wages (av) 10.2 c -1.7 c 1.9 c -3.2 c -3.3 1.0 6.3 6.9 6.6 6.6
Unit labour costs (Rp-based; av) 11.3 c 0.8 c 1.7 c 0.6 c -3.4 3.2 8.0 6.6 5.4 5.4
Unit labour costs (US$-based) 10.7 c -5.3 c 2.3 c -2.4 c -1.5 -0.9 0.4 7.1 3.0 3.1
Labour costs per hour (Rp) 13,142 c 13,348 c 13,979 c 13,809 c 13,560 14,265 15,678 17,136 18,764 20,471
Labour costs per hour (US$) 1.0 c 0.9 c 1.0 c 0.9 c 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.2
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -16.2 -30.6 -30.3 -4.4 3.3 6.3 -4.5 -10.2 -17.3 -17.9
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -1.6 -2.9 -2.7 -0.4 0.3 0.5 -0.4 -0.8 -1.2 -1.2
Goods: exports fob 168.9 180.7 168.5 163.4 232.8 266.4 261.6 265.6 280.6 299.3
Goods: imports fob -150.1 -181.0 -164.9 -135.1 -189.0 -216.7 -221.0 -230.0 -250.7 -271.0
Trade balance 18.8 -0.2 3.5 28.3 43.8 49.7 40.5 35.6 29.9 28.3
Services: credit 25.3 31.2 31.6 15.0 14.0 17.0 20.3 24.9 28.3 31.0
Services: debit -32.7 -37.7 -39.3 -24.8 -28.8 -33.4 -38.3 -41.6 -45.0 -47.2
Services balance -7.4 -6.5 -7.6 -9.8 -14.8 -16.3 -17.9 -16.7 -16.6 -16.2
Primary income: credit 5.6 9.3 7.4 5.2 6.7 7.8 9.5 10.7 11.9 13.1
Primary income: debit -37.7 -40.1 -41.1 -34.1 -38.7 -41.7 -43.7 -47.2 -51.0 -54.1
Primary income balance -32.1 -30.8 -33.8 -28.9 -32.0 -33.9 -34.3 -36.5 -39.1 -41.0
Secondary income: credit 10.0 12.2 12.7 10.6 10.8 11.8 12.4 12.7 14.1 17.1
Secondary income: debit -5.5 -5.3 -5.0 -4.7 -4.5 -4.9 -5.3 -5.3 -5.6 -6.0
Secondary income balance 4.5 6.9 7.6 5.9 6.3 6.9 7.1 7.4 8.5 11.1
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 86.7 86.9 83.1 79.4 92.7 c 103.1 98.1 97.3 97.9 99.0
Export prices (% change) 5.8 0.3 -4.4 -4.4 16.6 c 11.3 -4.9 -0.8 0.6 1.1
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 90.1 94.8 94.7 88.8 105.0 c 110.6 110.0 109.6 111.5 113.9
Import prices (% change) 5.5 5.3 -0.1 -6.2 18.2 c 5.3 -0.5 -0.3 1.8 2.2
Terms of trade (2010=100) 96.2 91.7 87.8 89.4 88.2 c 93.3 89.2 88.8 87.8 86.9
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 7.6 c 4.9 c -0.8 c -4.9 c 13.5 c 6.6 5.3 3.9 3.9 3.7
a Actual. b EIU forecasts. c EIU estimates.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ m)
Inward direct investment 20,510 18,910 24,994 19,175 20,515 22,900 25,200 28,000 29,700 31,000
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 2.0 1.8 2.2 1.8 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.1
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 6.3 5.6 6.9 5.7 5.6 6.0 6.7 6.9 6.8 6.6
Outward direct investment -2,008 -6,399 -4,463 -5,033 -4,029 -3,000 -2,780 -2,550 -2,350 -2,460
Net foreign direct investment 18,502 12,511 20,531 14,143 16,486 19,900 22,420 25,450 27,350 28,540
Stock of foreign direct investment 248,510 267,420 292,413 311,588 332,103 355,003 380,203 408,203 437,903 468,903
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 953.7 1,017.1 1,102.4 1,164.7 1,231.0 1,305.1 1,386.6 1,477.0 1,572.3 1,671.0
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 24.5 25.7 26.1 29.4 28.0 28.4 30.4 30.3 30.9 31.3
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 1.00 4.80 2.39 1.88 1.82 1.87 1.98 2.11 2.15 2.16
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.83 0.83 0.85 0.93 0.90 0.88 0.91 0.94 0.97 1.00
a Actual. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 353.6 379.6 402.1 417.5 440.8 457.4 472.9 491.0 510.9 530.7
Total external debt (% of GDP) 34.8 36.4 35.9 39.4 37.2 36.6 37.8 36.4 36.0 35.5
Debt/exports ratio (%) 107.0 111.4 124.5 145.7 112.7 101.9 105.9 106.6 104.5 99.9
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 28.2 23.9 37.3 34.9 24.3 22.4 23.6 23.6 22.6 21.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU
Global data US and OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
US and OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent Blend
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
US$ effective exchange rate: IMF, IFS; nominal weighted index, 1997=100
Domestic data GDP data: at constant 2010 prices
GDP growth by demand component: BPS, Indikator Ekonomi
US$ GDP: BPS, Indikator Ekonomi; in current prices converted from local currency at annual average market exchange rates
Population and growth: BPS, Indikator Ekonomi
GDP per head: US$ GDP divided by population
Real GDP growth per head: growth in real GDP deflated by population growth
Inflation: BI; 2018=100
Exchange rates: IMF, IFS; market rates expressed as rupiah per US dollar
Foreign direct investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report
Balance of payments: IMF, IFS
External debt: World Bank, International Debt Statistics
Debt-service ratio: total debt service as a proportion of earnings from exports of goods and services
Abbreviations BI: Bank Indonesia
BPS: Statistics Indonesia
IFS: International Financial Statistics
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows the EIU to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by the EIU for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2017-21) and from EIU assessments for the forecast period (2022-26). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by the EIU for 2017-21. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2022-26 are based on EIU assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; the EIU, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2017-21 ranges are then used to derive 2022-26 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2022-26, not to the likely situation in 2026 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2019 or 2024). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2017-21   2022-26  
  Indonesia Regional average a Indonesia Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 2 3.8 3 3.6
  2. Risk of social unrest 2 3.1 2 3.2
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 3 3.3 4 3.5
  4. Government and opposition 3 3.7 4 3.9
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 3 3.4 3 3.5
  6. International disputes or tensions 3 3.4 3 2.6
  7. Government policy towards business 3 3.5 3 3.5
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 2 3.4 3 3.3
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 2 3.3 2 3.4
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 2 2.9 3 3.2
 11. Efficiency of legal system 2 3.1 2 3.2
 12. Corruption 1 2.7 2 3.1
 13. Impact of crime 3 3.5 3 3.7
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 5 4.7 4 4.6
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 3 3.1 3 3.2
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 5 3.7 4 3.4
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 5 4.6 2 4.1
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 4 4.5 4 4.4
  6. Quality of policymaking 3 3.5 4 3.5
  7. Institutional underpinnings 3 3.5 4 3.6
  8. Asset prices 2 2.6 2 2.6
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 5 4.4 5 4.6
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 3 3.6 3 3.8
  3. Real GDP growth* 3 2.8 4 3.5
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 4 3.8 4 3.6
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 3 1.9 2 2.6
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 2 2.3 3 2.9
  7. The natural resource endowment* 4 2.4 4 2.4
  8. Profitability* 3 2.9 4 3.6
  9. Regional integration 3 2.9 4 3.2
 10. Proximity to markets 2 2.5 2 2.4
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 3 4.0 3 4.1
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 2 3.2 3 3.6
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 2 3.5 3 3.6
  4. Promotion of competition 2 2.9 3 3.1
  5. Protection of intellectual property 2 2.7 2 3.0
  6. Price controls 3 3.6 3 3.7
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 2 2.8 3 2.6
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 2 3.2 3 3.3
  9. Minority shareholders 2 3.4 3 3.5
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 3 3.6 4 3.7
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 3 3.4 3 3.4
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 2 3.9 3 4.1
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 3 3.3 3 3.4
  5. Government favouritism 3 3.6 3 3.5
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 4 3.8 4 3.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 4 3.8 4 4.1
  3. Ease of trading* 4 3.8 4 4.0
  4. Openness of trade* 3 3.8 4 4.1
  5. Restrictions on the current account 4 4.5 4 4.5
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 4 3.7 5 3.9
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 5 4.5 4 4.3
  3. Value-added tax* 4 4.2 4 3.9
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 4 3.8 4 3.9
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 2 3.1 4 3.6
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 2 3.3 3 3.5
  7. Tax complexity 2 3.2 3 3.5
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 3 3.4 3 3.4
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 3 3.9 3 4.0
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 4 4.1 4 4.1
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 2 3.2 3 3.4
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 2 3.3 4 3.8
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 3 3.5 3 3.7
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 5 4.2 5 4.2
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 2 3.4 3 3.9
  3. Quality of workforce* 2 3.1 3 3.2
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 3 3.6 3 3.6
  5. Health of the workforce* 3 4.0 3 4.1
  6. Level of technical skills 2 3.5 3 3.6
  7. Cost of living* 3 2.5 6 3.1
  8. Incidence of strikes* 3 3.7 4 3.8
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 3 3.3 3 3.4
 10. Extent of wage regulation 4 3.7 4 3.6
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 2 3.2 2 2.9
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 2 3.5 3 3.6
  2. Broadband connection speed* 2 3.5 5 4.2
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 2 3.1 3 3.6
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 3 3.4 3 3.6
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 2 2.6 2 3.1
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 3 3.5 3 3.7
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 2 3.5 3 3.8
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 2 2.8 3 3.2
  9. Rents of office space* 1 2.2 1 2.1
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 2 3.6 3 3.7
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 3 3.8 4 4.1
  3. Scope of e-government* 3 3.6 3 3.8
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 5 3.9 3 3.6
  5. Internet use* 2 3.1 4 3.6
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 3 3.2 4 3.8
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 1 3.2 2 3.5
  8. Research infrastructure* 2 3.4 2 3.4
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.

Subject: Tax rates; Exports; Disposable income; Foreign exchange rates; Politics; Pandemics; Productivity; Consumer goods; Consumption; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Population growth; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Presidential elections; Tax reform; Job creation; Economic growth

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Exports Disposable income Foreign exchange rates Productivity Consumer goods Consumption International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Tax reform Job creation Economic growth; Industry: 92111 :‎ Executive Offices

Location: Indonesia; Asia-Pacific region

People: Joko Widodo (Jokowi)

Company / organization: Name: Association of Southeast Asian Nations--ASEAN; NAICS: 928120

Classification: 92111: Executive Offices

Identifier / keyword: Indonesia; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Forecast Indonesia April 2022

Publication title: Country Forecast. Indonesia; New York

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Apr 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09669426

e-ISSN: 20489390

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Statistics, Country Report

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2714193683

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/count ry-forecast-indonesia-april-2022/docview/2714193683/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Lebanon April 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-lebanon-april-2022/docview/2719631186/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Lebanon&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Lebanon+April+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-04-04&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Lebanon&amp;rft.issn=13507141&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Lebanon; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Lebanon; Middle East

Title: Country Report Lebanon April 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Lebanon; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Apr 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507141

e-ISSN: 20475160

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2719631186

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-lebanon-april-2022/docview/2719631186/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-10-01

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report China April 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-china-april-2022/docview/2718526810/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+China&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+China+April+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-04-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+China&amp;rft.issn=1473897X&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: China; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: China; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report China April 2022

Publication title: Country Report. China; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Apr 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 1473897X

e-ISSN: 20474539

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2718526810

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-china-april-2022/docview/2718526810/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-09-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Serbia March 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-serbia-march-2022/docview/2707779422/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Serbia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Serbia+March+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-03-03&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Serbia&amp;rft.issn=1756431X&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Serbia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Serbia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Serbia March 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Serbia; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Mar 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 1756431X

e-ISSN: 20475764

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2707779422

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-serbia-march-2022/docview/2707779422/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-08-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Montenegro 1st Quarter 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-montenegro-1st-quarter-2022/docview/2707507432/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Montenegro&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Montenegro+1st+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-03-02&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Montenegro&amp;rft.issn=17564301&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Montenegro; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Montenegro; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Montenegro 1st Quarter 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Montenegro; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Mar 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 17564301

e-ISSN: 20475772

Sourcetype: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2707507432

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-montenegro-1st-quarter-2022/docview/2707507432/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-08-29

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Lebanon March 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-lebanon-march-2022/docview/2707507424/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Lebanon&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Lebanon+March+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-03-02&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Lebanon&amp;rft.issn=13507141&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Lebanon; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Lebanon; Middle East

Title: Country Report Lebanon March 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Lebanon; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Mar 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507141

e-ISSN: 20475160

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2707507424

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-lebanon-march-2022/docview/2707507424/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-08-29

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Hong Kong March 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-hong-kong-march-2022/docview/2707280632/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;rft.genre=report&amp;rft.jtitle=&amp;rft.atitle=&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-03-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=Country+Report+Hong+Kong+March+2022&amp;rft.title=Country+Report+Hong+Kong+March+2022&amp;rft.issn=&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Asia-Pacific region; Hong Kong China; China

Identifier / keyword: Hong Kong; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Hong Kong March 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Hong Kong; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Mar 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

e-ISSN: 20472684

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2707280632

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-hong-kong-march-2022/docview/2707280632/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2023-12-03

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Mexico March 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-mexico-march-2022/docview/2707280487/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Mexico&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Mexico+March+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-03-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Mexico&amp;rft.issn=02695936&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Mexico; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Mexico; Latin America

Title: Country Report Mexico March 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Mexico; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Mar 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695936

e-ISSN: 20475349

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2707280487

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-mexico-march-2022/docview/2707280487/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-08-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Slovenia 1st Quarter 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-slovenia-1st-quarter-2022/docview/2696545147/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Slovenia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Slovenia+1st+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-02-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Slovenia&amp;rft.issn=13664131&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Slovenia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Slovenia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Slovenia 1st Quarter 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Slovenia; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Feb 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 13664131

e-ISSN: 20475802

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2696545147

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-slovenia-1st-quarter-2022/docview/2696545147/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-07-31

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Yemen 1st Quarter 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-yemen-1st-quarter-2022/docview/2696545062/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Yemen&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Yemen+1st+Quarter+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-02-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Yemen&amp;rft.issn=14626675&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Yemen; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Yemen; Middle East

Title: Country Report Yemen 1st Quarter 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Yemen; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Feb 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 14626675

e-ISSN: 20476604

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2696545062

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-yemen-1st-quarter-2022/docview/2696545062/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-07-31

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Serbia February 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-serbia-february-2022/docview/2696544966/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Serbia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Serbia+February+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-02-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Serbia&amp;rft.issn=1756431X&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Serbia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Serbia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Serbia February 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Serbia; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Feb 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 1756431X

e-ISSN: 20475764

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2696544966

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-serbia-february-2022/docview/2696544966/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-07-31

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Venezuela January 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-january-2022/docview/2688856740/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Venezuela+January+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-01-15&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=13507133&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Report Venezuela January 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Venezuela; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jan 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507133

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2688856740

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-january-2022/docview/2688856740/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-07-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Turkey January 2022 Updater

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-turkey-january-2022-updater/docview/2714191325/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 10.0 3.4 2.6 4.6 3.3 3.4 Consumer price inflation (%) 19.6 31.4 20.2 15.3 12.0 9.8 Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.0 -3.6 -3.7 -3.5 -2.5 -2.4 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -2.4 -1.7 -2.3 -1.3 -1.9 -2.2 3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 18.7 16.2 15.6 15.7 13.1 11.0 Exchange rate TL: Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 84.3 Population growth 1.4 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 716 Real GDP growth 3.2 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,575b Real domestic demand growth 3.3 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 8,490 Inflation 12.5 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 30,531b Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.0 Exchange rate (av) TL: To win seats, parties need at least 10% of the national vote. Since the failed coup, power has been increasingly concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan, the AKP leader, who was re-elected for a second presidential term in June 2018. Negative real interest rates and high political risks have led to inadequate capital inflows into Turkey and raise the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Turkey&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Turkey+January+2022+Updater&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-01-14&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Turkey&amp;rft.issn=09668632&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - The re-election of Recep Tayyip Erdogan as president in June 2018 concluded Turkey's shift from a parliamentary to a presidential republic. EIU expects Mr Erdogan and his conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) to stay in power until at least 2023 (when the next presidential and parliamentary elections are due), maintaining a tight grip on national institutions and the media in order to continue to dominate Turkish politics.
- The economy has become less stable as a result of domestic political tensions, fraught international relations and unorthodox economic policies. This has jeopardised the hard-won improvements in macroeconomic stability on which the AKP built much of its previous electoral success. The government's unorthodox and unpredictable policies in response to the coronavirus outbreak have created further sources of economic instability.
- Turkey's foreign policy priorities have shifted under the AKP since the early 2000s. Declining trust in the US and the EU, a gradual shift to a multipolar world and an ambition to make Turkey a regional power have all incentivised the AKP to pursue a "Turkey first" approach to foreign policy. Turkey is at odds with its peers in the eastern Mediterranean over maritime borders and vast offshore gas reserves. Turkey has openly backed Azerbaijan in its military conflict with Armenia over Nagorny Karabakh, and has deployed peacekeeping troops to the region, alongside Russian troops.
- A more favourable external environment, together with the strength of Turkey's industrial sector, continues to underpin our view that real GDP growth accelerated to an estimated 10% in 2021. We expect average growth of 3.4% per year in 2022-26-short of the government's annual 5% target, but close to Turkey's medium-term potential.
- Turkey's heavy reliance on often volatile, short-term capital inflows to fund lending and drive economic growth leaves the economy vulnerable to sudden shifts in investor sentiment. The longer the current policy of low interest rates remains in force and the market volatility persists, the greater the risk of an eventual foreign-exchange shortage will become. The risk of a balance-of-payments crisis is high.

Country forecast overview: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 10.0 3.4 2.6 4.6 3.3 3.4
Consumer price inflation (%) 19.6 31.4 20.2 15.3 12.0 9.8
Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.0 -3.6 -3.7 -3.5 -2.5 -2.4
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -2.4 -1.7 -2.3 -1.3 -1.9 -2.2
3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 18.7 16.2 15.6 15.7 13.1 11.0
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 8.92 13.45 14.25 15.75 16.88 17.50
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.18 1.12 1.13 1.18 1.22 1.24
Country forecast overview: Business environment rankings                
Value of index a     Global rank b     Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26
6.21 6.17   44 55   17 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

- Turkey's business environment score decreases slightly in the forecast period (2022-26). However, the country's global ranking drops by 11 places, to 55th, and it falls to last place in the regional ranking. Political tensions, increased powers concentrated under the president, a politicised central bank and high domestic inflation have raised uncertainty about the direction of economic policy.

Country forecast overview: Turkey's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: Adverse market conditions delay any reform momentum and privatisation deals.
2024-26: Networks of patronage remain a constraint on the free market. Competition is still limited in several sectors.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) has been a government priority, but macroeconomic instability; increased nationalism; and concerns about security, corruption and politicisation of the judicial system will curb inflows.
2024-26: Further privatisation and government incentives to attract investment in major sectors could boost FDI inflows.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: The threat of sanctions by the US and the EU continues to hurt Turkey's trade and investment environment.
2024-26: Negotiations with the EU to update the customs union are likely to be protracted, given poor Turkish-EU relations.
Taxes 2022-23: Finance minister will reintroduce a more prudent approach to public finances. No tax rises in 2023 election year.
2024-26: Tax collection capacity will improve, but tax evasion remains an issue.
Financing 2022-23: Government lending policy leads to a sharp increase in contingent liabilities.
2024-26: The government reverts to relying on state banks to extend credit and support economic growth. Reliance on capital inflows amid tighter global liquidity continues. Contingent liabilities remain problematic.
The labour market 2022-23: Government measures to support employment and ban lay-offs end. The inactivity rate continues to rise, and the size of the shadow economy increases.
2024-26: Some improvements for employers, with legislation on severance pay and more flexible employment regulation.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Next stage of Istanbul airport is operational. Slower progress made on other projects, including Istanbul Canal.
2024-26: Landmark road and bridge projects near completion. New industrial zones become operational. Other major urban infrastructure projects around Istanbul could progress. Nevertheless, gaps and bottlenecks may persist.
Technological readiness 2022-23: Spending on research and development remains moderate, at about 1% of GDP, holding back efforts to move the economy up the value-added ladder.
2024-26: Turkey's young population spurs further rapid digital transformation of the banking sector.
Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 84.3 Population growth 1.4
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 716 Real GDP growth 3.2
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,575 b Real domestic demand growth 3.3
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 8,490 Inflation 12.5
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 30,531 b Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.0
Exchange rate (av) TL:US$ 7.01 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.5
a Actual. b EIU estimates.
Background: The Turkish Republic was formed in 1923. Nationalist resistance forces led by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk defeated the occupying allies after the first world war, establishing the country's current borders. Since then, Turkey's political and economic structure has been oriented towards the West. The country became a member of the Council of Europe in 1949 and NATO in 1952, and signed an association agreement with the then European Community in 1963. A customs union with the EU took effect in 1996. EU accession negotiations were opened in 2005, but progress has been slow, as Turkey's Western-EU anchor has weakened over the past decade. Under current political circumstances accession will not be possible in 2022-26.
Political structure: Turkey is a centralised secular democratic state, but checks and balances are limited and its secular character has been weakened by the religious-conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP), which came to power in 2002. Turkey has a history of military coups-in 1960, 1971 and 1980-leading to periods of military rule. There was a failed coup in July 2016. Turkey has a presidential system of government, in place since the president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, changed the parliamentary system in 2018, with parliament elected for a five-year term. To win seats, parties need at least 10% of the national vote. Since the failed coup, power has been increasingly concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan, the AKP leader, who was re-elected for a second presidential term in June 2018.
Policy issues: Maintaining macroeconomic stability and stabilising the lira since the pandemic began in 2020 are the major policy challenges. The government rolled out a large fiscal stimulus to support the economy in 2020 and is using its state banks to expand credit growth. This has led to major external imbalances and a sharp lira sell-off. Negative real interest rates and high political risks have led to inadequate capital inflows into Turkey and raise the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis. The Kurdish issue, which has blocked economic development in the south-east, is an important challenge, but peace talks with the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) collapsed in July 2015, and there has been a resurgence in violence. Politicisation of the judiciary since the coup attempt has undermined its independence. Corruption and patronage are widespread.
Taxation: The corporation tax rate was raised from 20% to 22% in 2018. Personal income tax rates range between 15% and 35%. In January 2020 the highest marginal tax rate was raised from 35% to 40% for incomes of more than TL500,000 (US$37,000). Reducing tax evasion was one of the elements of previous IMF programmes, but compliance remains weak.
Foreign trade: In 2020 goods exports totalled US$168.4bn and imports US$206.3bn, creating a trade deficit of about US$37.9bn. This drove a current-account deficit of US$35bn (5% of GDP).
Major exports 2020 % of total Major imports 2020 % of total
Transport equipment 31.0 Chemicals 14.7
Textiles & clothing 17.5 Machinery 11.5
Agro-industry 10.9 Transport equipment 9.5
Iron & steel 6.3 Fuels 5.2
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
Germany 9.9 China 11.0
UK 7.0 Germany 10.4
US 6.3 Russia 8.5
Iraq 5.7 US 5.5
Outlook for 2022-26: Political stability Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president, and his conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) have dominated Turkey's political scene since 2002. During this period they have tightened their grip on authority, replacing Turkey's parliamentary system with an executive presidential system in 2018. The economy has become less stable as a result of political tensions, fraught international relations and unorthodox economic policies. This has jeopardised the hard-won improvements in macroeconomic stability on which the AKP built much of its previous electoral success.
Mr Erdogan's popularity has declined. Prices are shooting up, and the Turkish lira has crashed. This has pushed people to take to the streets to protest against Mr Erdogan's handling of the economy. This, alongside public dissatisfaction with widespread corruption, has damaged the government. Signs of factionalism within the AKP are also on the rise, with defections from the ranks of Mr Erdogan's entourage. However, we expect the administration to increase its pressure on all kinds of opposition and dissent in the coming months. Restrictions on freedom of speech and assembly, including social media, are likely to be stepped up, and disregard for human rights to persist. EIU expects Mr Erdogan to be re-elected in mid-2023 (when his current term ends) and to continue to dominate Turkish politics over the forecast period through a mixture of authoritarianism, control of state resources and the bureaucracy-all aided by a largely supportive domestic media.
Anti-refugee sentiment is high in Turkey, and the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan will only make this more central to the politics of Mr Erdogan and the AKP. Discussions have also begun on a new constitution, with the AKP planning to make its draft public in early 2022. This could include processes to ensure that Mr Erdogan stays in power beyond 2028, when his second term as president would end (assuming, as seems likely, that he is re-elected in 2023), as well as a strengthening of parliamentary powers. Mr Erdogan also plans to introduce economic and judicial reforms, improve human rights and strengthen property rights, which should appease Western governments and foreign investors. However, we expect only limited progress to be made, especially on the human rights front, in 2022-26.
Outlook for 2022-26: Election watch The next presidential and parliamentary elections will be held no later than mid-2023. The president has repeatedly stated that these elections will not be brought forward. However, as Turkey's economy continues to suffer, the risk of snap elections is growing. Critically, several parties are now competing against Mr Erdogan for conservative and right-of-centre votes. Polls in early December gave the Good Party (IP) about 14.5% of the vote. The IP has allied itself with the perennial main opposition party, the Republican People's Party (CHP), which got 27% of the vote. Together they pose a substantial threat to the AKP (which garnered 30.9%) and its right-wing ally, the Nationalist Action Party (MHP; which received about 8%). In the presidential election Mr Erdogan is currently leading.
We expect Mr Erdogan and the AKP to win the next presidential and parliamentary elections but the result to be close. This is in part because his and the party's popularity among Turkey's conservative voter base is still relatively strong. More importantly, the president's control of the media, the government's strategy of dividing the opposition, its use of the police to quell public protests from all kinds of opposition groups and the likely manipulation of the electoral law (including by increasing the threshold to enter parliament ahead of the vote to bolster the AKP's prospects) all represent important challenges for the opposition.
Outlook for 2022-26: International relations The AKP and Mr Erdogan are seeking to bolster Turkey's standing as a regional power in the Middle East. This increasingly assertive foreign policy remains popular with many voters and has helped the AKP to distract Turkish citizens from other domestic economic and political concerns. However, this approach is isolating Turkey in the region and internationally.
Human rights are a leading issue in Turkish-EU relations, alongside Cyprus and territorial rights in the eastern Mediterranean. In May 2021 the European Parliament demanded that the European Commission formally suspend EU accession talks with Turkey over human rights issues. Turkey is on a collision course with a fellow NATO member, Greece, which it has antagonised by its continuous deployment of an energy exploration research vessel in disputed waters in the gas-rich eastern Mediterranean. In December 2020 these prospecting activities led the EU to impose sanctions on Turkish energy officials and threaten wider action, but tensions have eased of late, with Turkey pausing its activities in the disputed waters.
Turkish-US relations have been strained by Turkey's purchase of the Russian-made S-400 defence system in 2019, despite the country's membership of NATO. In response the US introduced sanctions in December 2020, but these are mild and target Turkey's defence procurement agency-cutting the country off from US military hardware and technology. There is a risk that the US will impose stronger sanctions (for instance, if Turkey activates the S-400 defence system). In the worst-case scenario, Turkey could be denied access to inter-national financial institutions, but we expect US policy to continue emphasising the need to keep Turkey in the Western camp.
Given the fragility of the economy and the vulnerability of the lira, Turkey can ill afford deeper rows with the US and the EU-especially as its economy is closely entwined with Europe's. Nevertheless, we do not expect any improvement in Turkey's relations with the EU or the US in 2022-26.
Outlook for 2022-26: Policy trends The economic downturn in 2020 led to the biggest credit growth boom in a decade, facilitated by Turkey's state-owned banks and a politicised central bank. This has kept inflation high, owing to the depreciation of the lira against all other major currencies. In November 2020 Mr Erdogan made a step towards policy normality by appointing a former finance minister, Naci Agbal (known for championing orthodox monetary policies), as governor of the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT). However, Mr Erdogan replaced Mr Agbal in March 2021, damaging financial market sentiment again. The new governor, Sahap Kavcioglu, shares the president's unorthodox view that high interest rates cause inflation. Since September the main policy rate has been cut by a total of 500 basis points, to 14%, despite accelerating inflation. The cuts are the result of political pressure from Mr Erdogan.
Mr Erdogan, who is an ardent supporter of low interest rates and cheap credit, has insisted that the current path of low policy rates will not change. Turkey's economy depends on continuing flows of capital from abroad, including bank lending and investments in Turkish bonds, in order to meet its external debt obligations. However, lenders alarmed at the recent policy direction the country has taken have begun to reduce their exposure. It has already become expensive for the government and the private sector to borrow from abroad. The longer the current monetary policies remain in force and the market volatility persists, the greater the risk of an eventual foreign-exchange shortage will become. The risk of a balance-of-payments crisis is high.
Turkey's economy has displayed resilience during previous bouts of political instability and market volatility, owing to a prudent approach to the public finances, effective capitalisation of the banking sector, and a dynamic and diversified private sector. However, other shortcomings, such as cronyism and corruption, skills mismatches, and tax evasion, are unlikely to be effectively addressed in the forecast period.
Coronavirus cases are on the rise again since early January and Turkey recorded 77,722 new cases on January 12th-its highest daily figure since the start of the pandemic. However, we do not expect strict measures to contain the wave to be imposed. About 61.2% of the population had been fully vaccinated by mid-January.
Outlook for 2022-26: Fiscal policy After an estimated deficit of 3% of GDP in 2021, we expect the deficit to reach 3.6% in 2022. Mr Erdogan has ordered a 50% increase in the net minimum wage for 2022. Pensions and public-sector pay have been increased by at least 25%, with further increments due in mid-year. This will be coupled with the abolition of income tax on the minimum wage, and credit subsidies. Ahead of the election, we expect the deficit to remain wide by historical standards, at 3.7% of GDP in 2023. It will then narrow to an average of 2.8% of GDP in 2024-26 as the government reintroduces a more prudent approach to the public finances in an effort to recover policy credibility. We estimate government debt at 39.4% of GDP at end-2021, and expect it to fall gradually to 32% at end-2026.
Outlook for 2022-26: Monetary policy The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the CBT adopted an ultra-loose policy in the early stages of the coronavirus crisis, pushing real rates firmly into negative territory. This contributed to a lira sell-off, a rapid loss of foreign-exchange reserves and high inflation. The CBT then began to raise its main policy rate-the one-week repurchase (repo) rate-again, by a total of 1,075 basis points to 19% between September 2020 and March 2021.
However, since the replacement of the central bank governor, Mr Erdogan has pushed the central bank to cut the policy rate despite rising inflation and the prospect of global monetary tightening. As a result in September-December the MPC cut its headline interest rate by a total of 500 basis points to 14%. Real rates are now deep in negative territory. Significantly, the MPC said that with its latest rate cut it had completed "the use of the limited room implied by transitory effects on price increases". These remarks may be taken to imply that the CBT will not cut rates further in early 2022.
We expect the rate to be kept on hold in 2022, with a small hike in 2023 to avert a total collapse of the lira, and as the rest of the world is raising rates. In line with slowing inflation, we expect rate cuts in 2025-26. Turkey has already lost about 20% of its reserves since the currency crisis started, and net reserves are far lower than its gross reserves owing to its foreign-exchange obligations to banks and are now at their lowest since 2002.
Outlook for 2022-26: Economic growth In 2021 the economy grew by an estimated 10%, following three years of near stagnation. The low baseline caused by the onset of covid-19 in 2020, the loose monetary and credit policies adopted during the initial response to the pandemic, the reopening of restaurants and shopping malls, and the partial recovery in tourism all played a role. Economic activity held up well and expanded by an annual 12.3% on average in the first nine months of 2021. Annual GDP growth is likely to have slightly slowed in the last few months of 2021, owing to a less favourable baseline and the negative impacts of high inflation and currency volatility.
The government is once again pursuing loose monetary policy in order to boost the economy. However, a collapse in investor confidence has led to considerable capital outflows: this has heightened funding pressures for Turkish banks, which in turn have begun to tighten lending conditions. Meanwhile, the risks associated with these policies, alongside global monetary tightening and the prospect of weaker export demand growth, mean that overall we expect a slowdown in real GDP growth in 2022, to 3.4%. Uncertainties stemming from Turkey's macroeconomic imbalances, the country's economic policy, exchange-rate volatility, geopolitics and the coronavirus situation globally pose downside risks to this forecast. In 2023-26 we forecast average annual growth of 3.4%, which we believe is close to Turkey's medium-term potential.
Outlook for 2022-26: Inflation Inflation has been high in Turkey in recent years, mostly owing to the weakness of the lira against major currencies. However, in the wake of the CBT's mercurial policy management, the lira crashed and inflation hit its highest level in almost two decades in December. Annual price growth reached 36.1% (and averaged 19.6% in 2021) and is set to accelerate further in the months ahead. Persistent inflationary expectations, high global prices, loose monetary policy and a weak lira will keep inflation particularly high, at a forecast annual average of 31.4% in 2022-well above the central bank's 5% target. Declining commodity prices will cause inflation to ease, but we still expect it to average 14.3% in 2023-26 owing to the weakness of the lira against the US dollar. Renewed monetary policy easing, high currency volatility, supply-side disruptions and rising global oil prices pose risks to this forecast.
Outlook for 2022-26: Exchange rates Turkey is going through a currency crisis. Unlike in the past, the lira's crash has not been caused by issues in the country's economic fundamentals. Instead, the crisis reflects the increasingly erratic decision-making of Mr Erdogan. The already-battered lira tumbled against major currencies in September after Mr Erdogan pushed the CBT to cut its key interest rate despite rising inflation and the prospect of global monetary tightening. At over TL17:US$1 by the third week of December, the lira had shed half of its value against the US dollar in the space of three months. Although the lira recovered in late December after a set of promises that included a new kind of exchange-rate-proofed deposit account, and after the deployment of the central bank's reserves, it continues to trade at over TL13.5:US$1 compared with TL8.3:US$1 as recently as August 2021. Further volatility is to be expected given the government's unorthodox policies, low reserves, precarious external balances and the prospect of global monetary tightening.
The current monetary policy is unlikely to change. The CBT has sold foreign currency to prevent "unhealthy price formation" in the foreign-exchange market, but to little or no avail. Steps have been taken to shore up the reserves by increasing reserve requirements on foreign-currency deposits and obliging exporters to sell 25% of their earnings to the central bank.
Internal and external imbalances, high inflation, and a gradual normalisation of monetary policy in the US and the euro area will all contribute to a depreciation of the lira against the US dollar in 2022-26 (albeit not to the extent seen in November-December). Policy unpredictability, poor international relations, foreign investors' concerns regarding the central bank's independence and a reliance on short-term capital inflows will also weigh on the currency. As a result, we forecast that the lira will continue to follow a depreciatory path in 2022-26 (weakening by 11.8% in nominal terms on average).
Outlook for 2022-26: External sector We estimate that the current-account deficit narrowed to 2.4% of GDP in 2021, from 5% in 2020. The trade deficit has narrowed, whereas the services surplus has increased owing to the partial recovery in tourism. We expect the current-account deficit to remain relatively narrow in 2022-26 as tourism earnings continue to recover. The low-interest policies causing the weakness of the lira may have a limited positive effect on the current account by encouraging exports of goods and services and discouraging imports; however, many imported goods including energy raw materials are essential for the functioning of the economy. Attracting sufficient capital inflows to cover the deficit and service foreign debt, without drawdowns of foreign-exchange reserves, will be complicated by uncertainties relating to monetary and foreign policy. The sovereign increasingly relies on domestic financing (with support from the central bank), rather than tapping foreign funding sources.
The longer the current policies remain in force and the market volatility persists, the greater the risk of an eventual foreign-exchange shortage will become. The risk of a balance-of-payments crisis is high.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 3.2 2.9 2.3 -3.7 5.4 4.0 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.6
EU27 GDP growth 2.9 2.1 1.8 -6.1 5.0 4.1 2.5 2.1 2.0 1.8
Western Europe growth 2.9 1.9 1.5 -6.1 5.3 3.9 2.5 2.0 1.9 1.8
World trade growth 5.6 3.8 0.3 -4.9 9.7 5.7 4.4 3.9 3.6 3.8
US CPI 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.7 4.3 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2
EU27 CPI 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.6 2.6 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9
Manufactures export price 2.0 5.2 -1.5 0.8 6.9 1.4 2.1 1.8 2.2 2.3
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 70.4 74.1 66.5 61.0 55.5 53.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 0.1 0.5
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.12 1.13 1.18 1.22 1.24
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 128.4 131.4 139.1 143.7 145.7
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Expenditure on GDP (TL bn at current market prices)
GDP 3,122 3,748 4,308 5,019 5,715 6,700 8,072 9,809 11,412 13,155
Private consumption 1,831 2,107 2,449 2,850 3,341 3,826 4,380 5,072 5,869 6,790
Government consumption 449 550 668 764 970 1,303 1,605 1,903 2,182 2,452
Gross fixed investment 933 1,115 1,118 1,373 1,638 1,870 2,116 2,392 2,696 3,038
Exports of goods & services 814 1,159 1,404 1,436 2,366 3,616 4,471 5,403 6,383 7,216
Imports of goods & services 930 1,180 1,295 1,637 2,570 3,882 4,468 4,928 5,685 6,309
Stockbuilding 26 -3 -36 232 -30 -33 -33 -33 -33 -33
Domestic demand 3,239 3,769 4,198 5,219 5,919 6,966 8,069 9,335 10,714 12,248
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 855.9 776.2 759.2 716.1 640.9 498.1 566.5 622.8 676.2 751.7
Private consumption 501.8 436.4 431.6 406.7 374.7 284.4 307.4 322.1 347.8 388.0
Government consumption 123.1 113.9 117.7 109.1 108.7 96.9 112.6 120.8 129.3 140.1
Gross fixed investment 255.7 231.0 197.0 195.9 183.7 139.1 148.5 151.9 159.8 173.6
Exports of goods & services 223.1 240.0 247.5 204.9 265.3 268.8 313.8 343.0 378.2 412.4
Imports of goods & services 255.0 244.5 228.2 233.6 288.2 288.6 313.5 312.9 336.9 360.5
Stockbuilding 7.2 -0.6 -6.3 33.0 -3.4 -2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -2.0 -1.9
Domestic demand 887.7 780.7 739.9 744.7 663.7 517.9 566.2 592.7 634.9 699.9
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 58.6 56.2 56.8 56.8 58.5 57.1 54.3 51.7 51.4 51.6
Government consumption 14.4 14.7 15.5 15.2 17.0 19.4 19.9 19.4 19.1 18.6
Gross fixed investment 29.9 29.8 25.9 27.4 28.7 27.9 26.2 24.4 23.6 23.1
Stockbuilding 0.8 -0.1 -0.8 4.6 -0.5 -0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3
Exports of goods & services 26.1 30.9 32.6 28.6 41.4 54.0 55.4 55.1 55.9 54.9
Imports of goods & services 29.8 31.5 30.1 32.6 45.0 57.9 55.3 50.2 49.8 48.0
Memorandum item
National savings ratio (%) 30.7 29.7 25.1 32.0 b 28.1 27.4 25.8 24.0 23.3 22.8
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Real expenditure on GDP (TL bn at constant 2009 prices)
GDP 1,703.2 1,757.8 1,769.8 1,799.4 1,979.6 2,046.5 2,098.9 2,195.3 2,267.0 2,343.2
Private consumption 1,019.0 1,027.2 1,040.7 1,072.9 1,167.3 1,180.2 1,198.9 1,227.7 1,262.1 1,302.5
Government consumption 230.1 245.3 255.7 260.9 277.9 285.1 293.4 303.1 311.6 320.3
Gross fixed investment 502.9 503.7 439.1 469.0 499.5 518.5 538.2 558.1 577.1 596.7
Exports of goods & services 395.8 429.4 449.9 384.3 457.0 489.5 520.9 544.1 572.4 595.8
Imports of goods & services 413.1 391.2 365.2 394.4 428.6 433.4 459.1 445.7 464.6 480.5
Stockbuilding -31.57 -56.57 -50.32 6.62 6.62 6.62 6.62 8.00 8.50 8.50
Domestic demand 1,720.5 1,719.6 1,685.1 1,809.4 1,951.3 1,990.4 2,037.1 2,096.9 2,159.2 2,227.9
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 7.4 3.2 0.7 1.7 10.0 3.4 2.6 4.6 3.3 3.4
Private consumption 5.9 0.8 1.3 3.1 8.8 1.1 1.6 2.4 2.8 3.2
Government consumption 5.2 6.6 4.2 2.1 6.5 2.6 2.9 3.3 2.8 2.8
Gross fixed investment 8.1 0.2 -12.8 6.8 6.5 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.4 3.4
Exports of goods & services 12.4 8.5 4.8 -14.6 18.9 7.1 6.4 4.5 5.2 4.1
Imports of goods & services 10.3 -5.3 -6.7 8.0 8.7 1.1 5.9 -2.9 4.2 3.4
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.4 -1.5 0.4 3.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 7.0 -0.1 -2.0 7.4 7.8 2.0 2.3 2.9 3.0 3.2
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 3.6 0.5 0.8 1.8 5.2 0.7 0.9 1.4 1.6 1.8
Government consumption 0.7 0.9 0.6 0.3 0.9 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4
Gross fixed investment 2.4 0.0 -3.7 1.7 1.7 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.9
External balance 0.3 3.3 2.7 -5.4 2.1 1.4 0.3 1.7 0.4 0.3
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Origin of GDP (TL bn at constant 2009 prices)
GDP at factor cost 1509.5 1,559.6 1,574.6 1,587.9 b 1,723.1 1,781.4 1,827.0 1,910.9 1,973.3 2,039.6
Agriculture 106.3 108.5 112.1 118.7 124.0 127.1 130.3 133.6 136.9 140.3
Industry 470.1 472.6 458.7 463.1 482.5 504.3 527.0 550.7 575.4 601.3
Services 933.1 978.5 1,003.8 1,006.1 1,116.5 1,150.0 1,169.7 1,226.7 1,260.9 1,297.9
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 4.9 2.1 3.3 5.9 4.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Industry 9.3 0.5 -2.9 1.0 4.2 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5
Services 7.6 4.9 2.6 0.2 11.0 3.0 1.7 4.9 2.8 2.9
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 6.8 6.4 7.0 7.3 6.9 6.9 6.9 6.7 6.7 6.6
Industry 32.8 32.9 30.3 30.5 28.9 29.2 29.7 29.7 30.1 30.4
Services 60.4 60.7 62.6 62.2 64.2 63.9 63.4 63.6 63.3 63.0
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) 8.7 1.7 -0.6 1.6 17.8 4.6 2.0 2.5 2.3 2.0
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 3.8 1.0 3.0 6.8 7.2 0.9 0.1 2.2 1.0 1.1
Total factor productivity growth 1.8 0.4 2.1 3.2 6.8 0.3 0.5 2.6 1.4 1.5
Growth of capital stock 7.4 6.8 4.3 4.6 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.1 4.0
Growth of potential GDP 6.7 4.2 4.2 1.3 8.5 2.2 3.4 5.5 4.2 3.2
Growth of real GDP 7.4 c 3.2 c 0.7 c 1.7 c 10.0 3.4 2.6 4.6 3.3 3.4
Growth of real GDP per head 5.7 c 1.7 c -0.6 c 0.6 c 9.1 2.8 2.1 4.2 2.8 2.8
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 81.1 82.3 83.4 84.3 a 85.0 85.6 86.0 86.3 86.7 87.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 855.9 776.2 759.2 716.1 a 640.9 498.1 566.5 622.8 676.2 751.7
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 10,550 9,430 9,100 8,490 a 7,540 5,820 6,590 7,220 7,800 8,630
Private consumption (US$ bn) 501.8 436.4 431.6 406.7 a 374.7 284.4 307.4 322.1 347.8 388.0
Private consumption per head (US$) 6,190 5,300 5,170 4,820 a 4,410 3,320 3,580 3,730 4,010 4,450
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2310.8 2441.9 2502.6 2575.0 2929.2 3113.0 3278.9 3511.9 3702.7 3907.4
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 28,490 29,660 30,000 30,530 34,440 36,380 38,150 40,690 42,700 44,840
Personal disposable income (TL bn) 1,917.5 b 2,206.9 b 2,564.7 b 2,998.0 3,514.6 4,059.4 4,688.6 5,476.2 6,390.8 7,458.0
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 525.6 b 457.1 b 452.0 b 427.8 394.1 301.8 329.0 347.7 378.7 426.2
Growth of real disposable income (%) 5.9 b 0.8 b 1.3 b 3.5 8.8 2.0 2.5 3.3 3.7 4.1
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 1.08 1.09 1.09 1.10 a 1.10 1.09 1.10 1.10 1.11 1.08
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.91 0.88 0.85 0.68 0.50 c 0.55 0.57 0.59 0.63 0.63
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 1.92 1.87 1.97 b 2.05 2.03 c 2.01 2.04 2.04 2.09 2.10
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.98 0.94 0.99 0.99 a 1.03 0.98 0.99 0.96 0.92 0.91
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 21.7 22.2 23.2 24.0 21.8 22.0 22.2 18.4 17.1 16.4
Interest 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.7 3.1 3.4 4.0 3.6 3.4 3.4
Non-interest 19.9 20.2 20.9 21.3 18.7 18.6 18.2 14.9 13.8 12.9
Government revenue 20.2 20.2 20.3 20.5 18.8 18.4 18.4 15.0 14.7 14.0
Budget balance -1.5 -1.9 -2.9 -3.4 -3.0 -3.6 -3.7 -3.5 -2.5 -2.4
Primary balance 0.3 0.0 -0.6 -0.8 0.1 -0.3 0.3 0.1 0.9 1.0
Government debt 28.0 30.2 32.7 39.9 39.4 38.5 36.7 34.6 32.9 31.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 3.65 4.83 5.67 7.01 8.92 13.45 14.25 15.75 16.88 17.50
Exchange rate TL:US$ (year-end) 3.78 5.27 5.95 7.35 12.65 14.15 15.00 16.00 17.25 17.00
Exchange rate TL:€ (av) 4.12 5.70 6.35 8.00 10.55 15.00 16.03 18.51 20.50 21.70
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.18 1.12 1.13 1.18 1.22 1.24
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 73.9 b 63.3 b 61.7 b 55.3 50.1 41.4 46.2 46.3 46.7 47.8
Purchasing power parity TL:US$ (av) 1.35 1.53 1.72 1.95 1.95 2.15 2.46 2.79 3.08 3.37
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 15.7 19.1 26.1 36.0 51.7 3.9 3.5 3.7 3.3 1.8
Domestic credit growth (%) 19.0 17.6 16.2 38.4 35.6 -1.2 1.7 3.7 2.5 0.2
Lending rate (av; %) 15.7 23.7 20.4 12.9 20.9 a 18.6 15.5 12.8 11.4 10.6
Deposit rate (av; %) 12.4 18.1 18.8 10.8 18.4 16.9 13.5 11.5 9.0 7.8
3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 12.8 19.8 20.7 11.2 18.7 a 16.2 15.6 15.7 13.1 11.0
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 31.5 32.2 32.5 30.7 30.8 31.0 31.7 32.4 33.1 33.3
Labour force (% change) 3.5 2.2 0.9 -5.5 0.4 0.6 2.3 2.2 2.1 0.4
Employment (m) 28.1 28.7 28.0 26.7 27.4 28.1 28.8 29.4 30.1 30.7
Employment (% change) 3.5 2.2 -2.3 -4.8 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.3 2.2 2.2
Unemployment (m) 3.4 3.5 4.5 4.0 3.4 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.5
Unemployment rate (%) 10.9 10.9 13.8 13.2 11.7 11.5 11.3 11.2 10.7 10.0
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
Consumer prices (av) 11.1 16.3 15.2 12.3 19.6 a 31.4 20.2 15.3 12.0 9.8
Consumer prices (year-end) 11.7 20.1 11.8 14.6 36.1 a 18.7 17.5 13.5 10.8 9.5
Producer prices (av) 15.8 27.0 17.6 12.2 43.8 a 45.7 28.1 22.3 14.7 10.3
GDP deflator (av) 10.9 16.3 14.2 14.6 b 3.5 13.4 17.5 16.2 12.7 11.5
Private consumption deflator (av) 11.1 14.2 14.7 12.9 7.7 13.2 12.7 13.1 12.5 12.1
Government consumption deflator (av) 10.7 14.8 16.6 12.2 19.1 31.0 19.7 14.8 11.6 9.3
Fixed investment deflator (av) 13.1 19.4 14.9 15.0 12.0 10.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0
Average nominal wages 13.2 b 14.6 b 21.0 b 14.0 b 14.8 14.0 13.0 13.0 13.0 13.0
Average real wages 1.9 b -1.5 b 5.0 b 1.5 b -4.0 -13.3 -6.0 -2.0 0.9 2.9
Unit labour costs (TL-based; av) d 11.6 b 16.0 b 20.0 b 9.2 b 9.6 15.5 15.4 13.0 14.3 14.2
Unit labour costs (US$-based) d -7.6 b -12.4 b 2.1 b -11.6 b -13.9 -23.4 9.0 2.3 6.7 10.2
Labour costs per hour (TL) d 17.9 b 20.5 b 24.8 b 28.2 b 32.4 36.9 41.7 47.2 53.3 60.2
Labour costs per hour (US$) 4.9 b 4.2 b 4.4 b 4.0 b 3.6 2.7 2.9 3.0 3.2 3.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts. d Manufacturing only: public and private sectors.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -40.8 -21.7 5.3 -35.6 -15.1 -8.5 -12.9 -8.0 -13.0 -16.3
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.8 -2.8 0.7 -5.0 -2.4 -1.7 -2.3 -1.3 -1.9 -2.2
Goods: exports fob 169.2 178.9 182.2 168.4 224.3 228.7 241.0 242.8 245.2 245.3
Goods: imports fob -227.8 -219.6 -199.0 -206.3 -251.7 -249.6 -269.0 -261.2 -271.0 -279.0
Trade balance -58.6 -40.7 -16.8 -37.9 -27.4 -20.9 -28.0 -18.4 -25.8 -33.6
Services: credit 53.5 58.6 62.7 35.4 53.9 53.4 59.5 62.2 68.9 79.2
Services: debit -27.1 -28.5 -28.7 -23.9 -31.0 -30.6 -33.2 -38.6 -43.2 -47.8
Services balance 26.3 30.2 34.1 11.5 22.8 22.8 26.4 23.6 25.6 31.4
Primary income: credit 5.0 6.1 6.3 6.2 6.5 6.0 5.4 4.8 5.2 5.5
Primary income: debit -16.1 -18.1 -19.2 -15.6 -18.2 -17.2 -17.6 -18.4 -17.7 -18.5
Primary income balance -11.1 -11.9 -12.8 -9.4 -11.6 -11.3 -12.2 -13.6 -12.5 -13.0
Secondary income: credit 4.5 2.8 2.7 4.2 4.7 3.6 4.1 3.8 3.5 3.1
Secondary income: debit -2.0 -2.0 -1.9 -4.0 -3.6 -2.8 -3.2 -3.5 -3.8 -4.2
Secondary income balance 2.5 0.8 0.8 0.1 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.3 -0.3 -1.1
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 91.8 b 94.3 90.3 89.0 b 104.1 103.1 111.0 116.0 121.7 126.8
Export prices (% change) 1.8 b 2.8 -4.3 -1.4 b 17.0 -0.9 7.6 4.5 4.9 4.2
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 87.8 b 93.7 89.9 84.3 b 98.3 99.1 100.0 101.8 104.8 107.8
Import prices (% change) 7.4 b 6.7 -4.1 -6.2 b 16.7 0.8 0.8 1.8 3.0 2.9
Terms of trade (2010=100) 104.5 b 100.7 100.4 105.6 b 105.9 104.0 111.0 114.0 116.1 117.6
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 7.7 b 2.4 b -0.7 b -8.0 b 7.8 6.4 4.2 3.6 3.1 3.1
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ m)
Inward direct investment 11,042 12,822 9,266 7,554 14,000 10,000 9,356 11,067 12,035 12,987
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 1.3 1.7 1.2 1.1 2.2 2.0 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.7
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 4.3 5.6 4.7 3.9 7.6 7.2 6.3 7.3 7.5 7.5
Outward direct investment -2,703 -3,587 -2,943 -3,239 -6,000 -4,000 -2,890 -3,000 -3,145 -3,096
Net foreign direct investment 8,339 9,235 6,323 4,315 8,000 6,000 6,466 8,067 8,890 9,891
Stock of foreign direct investment 180,258 193,080 202,346 209,900 223,900 233,900 243,256 254,323 266,358 279,345
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 2,222 2,345 2,425 2,489 2,633 2,734 2,830 2,946 3,072 3,206
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 21.1 24.9 26.7 29.3 34.9 47.0 42.9 40.8 39.4 37.2
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.51 2.74 0.87 0.73 1.22 0.81 0.72 0.82 0.86 0.89
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.60 0.60 0.59 0.63 0.61 0.59 0.58 0.59 0.59 0.60
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 456.6 446.0 440.8 435.9 a 455.4 461.5 486.5 484.6 492.5 495.3
Total external debt (% of GDP) 53.3 57.5 58.1 60.9 a 71.1 92.7 85.9 77.8 72.8 65.9
Debt/exports ratio (%) 152.6 144.2 132.9 162.5 114.9 118.9 118.3 117.4 115.2 111.6
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 37.9 34.4 34.5 41.3 27.4 26.0 25.8 27.8 26.5 26.3
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU
Global data Global data
OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
Domestic data GDP growth and components: TurkStat
Population: UN Population database and EIU interpolation
Consumer prices: IMF, IFS; TurkStat
Industrial production: derived from OECD, Main Economic Indicators
Exchange rates and interest rates: IMF, IFS
External trade and balance of payments: IMF, IFS; Central Bank of Turkey; TurkStat
Central government financial balance: IMF, IFS; Turkish Treasury
Foreign direct investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report; Central Bank of Turkey
Abbreviations IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
TurkStat: Turkish Statistical Institute
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development

Subject: Tax rates; Privatization; Macroeconomics; Foreign exchange rates; Coups d'etat; Politics; International relations; Research & development expenditures; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Patronage; Presidents; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Interest rates; Economic growth; COVID-19; Foreign policy; Tax evasion

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Privatization Macroeconomics Foreign exchange rates International relations Research & development expenditures International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Interest rates Economic growth Tax evasion; Industry: 92111 :‎ Executive Offices

Location: Turkey; Middle East

People: Erdogan, Recep Tayyip

Company / organization: Name: Justice & Development Party-Turkey; NAICS: 813940

Classification: 92111: Executive Offices

Identifier / keyword: Turkey; Middle East

Title: Country Forecast Turkey January 2022 Updater

Publication title: Country Forecast. Turkey; New York

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jan 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09668632

e-ISSN: 20489730

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Statistics, Country Report

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2714191325

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-turkey-january-2022-update r/docview/2714191325/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Turkey January 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-turkey-january-2022/docview/2688335294/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Turkey&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Turkey+January+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-01-14&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Turkey&amp;rft.issn=02695464&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Turkey; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Turkey; Middle East

Title: Country Report Turkey January 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Turkey; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jan 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695464

e-ISSN: 20475977

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2688335294

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-turkey-january-2022/docview/2688335294/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-07-13

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Serbia January 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-serbia-january-2022/docview/2682089060/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Serbia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Serbia+January+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-01-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Serbia&amp;rft.issn=1756431X&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Serbia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Serbia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Serbia January 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Serbia; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jan 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 1756431X

e-ISSN: 20475764

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2682089060

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-serbia-january-2022/docview/2682089060/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-06-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Brazil January 2022

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-brazil-january-2022/docview/2682089034/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Brazil&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Brazil+January+2022&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2022-01-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Brazil&amp;rft.issn=02695731&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Brazil; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Brazil; Latin America

Title: Country Report Brazil January 2022

Publication title: Country Report. Brazil; London

Publication year: 2022

Publication date: Jan 2022

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695731

e-ISSN: 20474431

Source type: Report

Language ofpublication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2682089034

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-brazil-january-2022/docview/2682089034/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2022 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-06-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Turkey December 2021 Updater

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-turkey-december-2021-updater/docview/2713092892/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 10.0 3.7 3.5 3.5 3.3 3.4 Consumer price inflation (%) 18.6 20.7 13.3 12.0 10.4 9.0 Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.0 -3.3 -3.2 -2.9 -2.6 -2.3 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -1.0 -1.9 -1.7 -1.3 -1.2 -1.2 3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 19.1 16.2 14.0 12.8 11.1 9.3 Exchange rate TL: Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 84.3 Population growth 1.4 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 716 Real GDP growth 3.2 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,575b Real domestic demand growth 3.3 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 8,490 Inflation 12.5 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 30,531b Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.0 Exchange rate (av) TL: To win seats, parties need at least 10% of the national vote. Since the failed coup, power has been increasingly concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan, the AKP leader, who was re-elected for a second presidential term in June 2018. Negative real interest rates and high political risks have led to inadequate capital inflows into Turkey and raise the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Turkey&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Turkey+December+2021+Updater&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-12-09&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Turkey&amp;rft.issn=09668632&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - The re-election of Recep Tayyip Erdogan as president in June 2018 concluded Turkey's shift from a parliamentary to a presidential republic. EIU expects Mr Erdogan and his conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) to stay in power until at least 2023 (when the next presidential and parliamentary elections are due), maintaining a tight grip on national institutions and the media in order to continue to dominate Turkish politics.
- The economy has become less stable as a result of domestic political tensions, fraught international relations and unorthodox economic policies. This has jeopardised the hard-won improvements in macroeconomic stability on which the AKP built much of its previous electoral success. The government's unorthodox and unpredictable policies in response to the coronavirus outbreak have created further sources of economic instability.
- Turkey's foreign policy priorities have shifted under the AKP since the early 2000s. Declining trust in the US and the EU, a gradual shift to a multipolar world and an ambition to make Turkey a regional power have all incentivised the AKP to pursue a "Turkey first" approach to foreign policy. Turkey is at odds with its peers in the eastern Mediterranean over maritime borders and vast offshore gas reserves. Turkey has openly backed Azerbaijan in its military conflict with Armenia over Nagorny Karabakh, and has deployed peacekeeping troops to the region, alongside Russian troops.
- A more favourable external environment, together with the strength of Turkey's industrial sector, continues to underpin our view that real GDP growth will have accelerated to an estimated 10% in 2021. We expect average growth of 3.5% per year in 2022-26-short of the government's annual 5% target, but close to Turkey's medium-term potential.
- Turkey's heavy reliance on often volatile, short-term capital inflows to fund lending and drive economic growth leaves the economy vulnerable to sudden shifts in investor sentiment. The longer the current policy of low interest rates remains in force and the market volatility persists, the greater the risk of an eventual foreign-exchange shortage will become. The risk of a balance-of-payments crisis is high.

Country forecast overview: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 10.0 3.7 3.5 3.5 3.3 3.4
Consumer price inflation (%) 18.6 20.7 13.3 12.0 10.4 9.0
Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.0 -3.3 -3.2 -2.9 -2.6 -2.3
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -1.0 -1.9 -1.7 -1.3 -1.2 -1.2
3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 19.1 16.2 14.0 12.8 11.1 9.3
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 8.92 12.09 14.00 15.50 16.88 17.50
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
Country forecast overview: Business environment rankings                
Value of index a     Global rank b     Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26
6.21 6.17   44 55   17 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

- Turkey's business environment score increases slightly in the forecast period (2022-26). However, the country's global ranking drops by eleven places, to 55th, and it falls to last place in the regional ranking. Political tensions, increased powers concentrated under the president, a politicised central bank and high domestic inflation have raised uncertainty about the direction of economic policy.

Country forecast overview: Turkey's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: Adverse market conditions delay any reform momentum and privatisation deals.
2024-26: Networks of patronage remain a constraint on the free market. Competition is still limited in several sectors.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) has been a government priority, but macroeconomic instability; increased nationalism; and concerns about security, corruption and politicisation of the judicial system will curb inflows.
2024-26: Further privatisation and government incentives to attract investment in major sectors could boost FDI inflows.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: The threat of sanctions by the US and the EU continues to hurt Turkey's trade and investment environment.
2024-26: Negotiations with the EU to update the customs union are likely to be protracted, given poor Turkish-EU relations.
Taxes 2022-23: Finance minister will reintroduce a more prudent approach to public finances. No tax rises in 2023 election year.
2024-26: Tax collection capacity will improve, but tax evasion remains an issue.
Financing 2022-23: The Central Bank of Turkey continues its monetary easing cycle. Government lending policy leads to a sharp increase in contingent liabilities.
2024-26: The government reverts to relying on state banks to extend credit and support economic growth. Reliance on capital inflows amid tighter global liquidity continues. Contingent liabilities remain problematic.
The labour market 2022-23: Government measures to support employment and ban lay-offs end. The inactivity rate continues to rise, and the size of the shadow economy increases.
2024-26: Some improvements for employers, with legislation on severance pay and more flexible employment regulation.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Next stage of Istanbul airport is operational. Slower progress made on other projects, including Istanbul Canal.
2024-26: Landmark road and bridge projects near completion. New industrial zones become operational. Other major urban infrastructure projects around Istanbul could progress. Nevertheless, gaps and bottlenecks may persist.
Technological readiness 2022-23: Spending on research and development remains moderate, at about 1% of GDP, holding back efforts to move the economy up the value-added ladder.
2024-26: Turkey's young population spurs further rapid digital transformation of the banking sector.
Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 84.3 Population growth 1.4
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 716 Real GDP growth 3.2
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,575 b Real domestic demand growth 3.3
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 8,490 Inflation 12.5
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 30,531 b Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.0
Exchange rate (av) TL:US$ 7.01 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.5
a Actual. b EIU estimates.
Background: The Turkish Republic was formed in 1923. Nationalist resistance forces led by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk defeated the occupying allies after the first world war, establishing the country's current borders. Since then, Turkey's political and economic structure has been oriented towards the West. The country became a member of the Council of Europe in 1949 and NATO in 1952, and signed an association agreement with the then European Community in 1963. A customs union with the EU took effect in 1996. EU accession negotiations were opened in 2005, but progress has been slow, as Turkey's Western-EU anchor has weakened over the past decade. Under current political circumstances accession will not be possible in 2022-26.
Political structure: Turkey is a centralised secular democratic state, but checks and balances are limited and its secular character has been weakened by the religious-conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP), which came to power in 2002. Turkey has a history of military coups-in 1960, 1971 and 1980-leading to periods of military rule. There was a failed coup in July 2016. Turkey has a presidential system of government, in place since the president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, changed the parliamentary system in 2018, with parliament elected for a five-year term. To win seats, parties need at least 10% of the national vote. Since the failed coup, power has been increasingly concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan, the AKP leader, who was re-elected for a second presidential term in June 2018.
Policy issues: Maintaining macroeconomic stability and stabilising the lira since the pandemic began in 2020 are the major policy challenges. The government rolled out a large fiscal stimulus to support the economy in 2020 and is using its state banks to expand credit growth. This has led to major external imbalances and a sharp lira sell-off. Negative real interest rates and high political risks have led to inadequate capital inflows into Turkey and raise the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis. The Kurdish issue, which has blocked economic development in the south-east, is an important challenge, but peace talks with the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) collapsed in July 2015, and there has been a resurgence in violence. Politicisation of the judiciary since the coup attempt has undermined its independence. Corruption and patronage are widespread.
Taxation: The corporation tax rate was raised from 20% to 22% in 2018. Personal income tax rates range between 15% and 35%. In January 2020 the highest marginal tax rate was raised from 35% to 40% for incomes of more than TL500,000 (US$60,000). Reducing tax evasion was one of the elements of previous IMF programmes, but compliance remains weak.
Foreign trade: In 2020 goods exports totalled US$168.4bn and imports about US$206.3bn, creating a trade deficit of about US$37.9bn. This drove a current-account deficit of US$35bn (4.9% of GDP).
Major exports 2020 % of total Major imports 2020 % of total
Transport equipment 31.0 Chemicals 14.7
Textiles & clothing 17.5 Machinery 11.5
Agro-industry 10.9 Transport equipment 9.5
Iron & steel 6.3 Fuels 5.2
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
Germany 9.9 China 11.0
UK 7.0 Germany 10.4
US 6.3 Russia 8.5
Iraq 5.7 US 5.5
Outlook for 2022-26: Political stability Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president, and his conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) have dominated Turkey's political scene since 2002. During this period they have tightened their grip on authority, replacing Turkey's parliamentary system with an executive presidential system in 2018. The economy has become less stable as a result of political tensions, fraught international relations and unorthodox economic policies. This has jeopardised the hard-won improvements in macroeconomic stability on which the AKP built much of its previous electoral success.
Mr Erdogan's popularity has declined but remains strong, and EIU expects him to be re-elected in mid-2023 (when his current term ends) and to continue to dominate Turkish politics over the forecast period (2022-26) through a mixture of authoritarianism, control of state resources and the bureaucracy, and his personal popularity-all aided by a largely supportive domestic media. The government will continue to clamp down on domestic political opposition. However, downside risks to our forecast exist. Prices are shooting up, and the lira has crashed (it lost almost 30% of its value in November alone). This has pushed people to take to the streets to protest against Mr Erdogan's handling of the economy-an usual occurrence in Turkey. The devaluation of the lira, alongside public dissatisfaction with widespread corruption, has damaged the government. Signs of factionalism within the AKP are also on the rise, with defections from the ranks of Mr Erdogan's entourage. Some private-sector figures have also become bolder in opposing the president's 'policies.
Anti-refugee sentiment is high in Turkey, and the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan will only make this more central to the politics of Mr Erdogan and the AKP. Discussions have also begun on a new constitution, with the AKP planning to make its draft public in early 2022. This could include processes to ensure that Mr Erdogan stays in power beyond 2028, when his second term as president would end (assuming, as seems likely, that he is re-elected in 2023), as well as a strengthening of parliamentary powers. Mr Erdogan also plans to introduce economic and judicial reforms, improve human rights and strengthen property rights, which should appease Western governments and foreign investors. However, we expect only limited progress to be made, especially on the human rights front, in 2022-26.
Outlook for 2022-26: Election watch The next presidential and parliamentary elections will be held no later than mid-2023. The president has repeatedly stated that these elections will not be brought forward. However, as Turkey's economy continues to suffer, the risk of snap elections will grow. Critically, several parties are now competing against Mr Erdogan for conservative and right-of-centre votes. Polls at end-November gave the Good Party (IP) about 14% of the vote. The IP has allied itself with the perennial main opposition party, the Republican People's Party (CHP), which got about 27% of the vote. Together they pose a substantial threat to the AKP (which garnered 31.5%) and its right-wing ally, the Nationalist Action Party (MHP; which received about 8%). In the presidential election Mr Erdogan is currently leading. However, there is as yet no common opposition presidential candidate.
We expect Mr Erdogan and the AKP to win the next presidential and parliamentary elections. This is in part because his and the party's popularity among Turkey's conservative voter base is still strong. More importantly, the president's control of the media, the government's strategy of dividing the opposition, its use of the police to quell public protests from all kinds of opposition groups and the likely manipulation of the electoral law (including by increasing the threshold to enter parliament ahead of the vote to bolster the AKP's prospects) all represent important challenges in the way of the opposition.
Outlook for 2022-26: International relations The AKP and Mr Erdogan are seeking to bolster Turkey's standing as a regional power in the Middle East. This increasingly assertive foreign policy-including reg-arding Azerbaijan, Syria and the eastern Mediterranean-remains popular with many voters and has also helped the AKP to distract Turkish citizens from other domestic economic and political concerns. However, this approach is isolating Turkey in the region and internationally.
Human rights are already a leading issue in Turkish-EU relations, alongside Cyprus and territorial rights in the eastern Mediterranean. In May 2021 the European Parliament demanded that the European Commission formally suspend EU accession talks with Turkey over human rights issues. Turkey is on a collision course with a fellow NATO member, Greece, which it has antagonised by its continuous deployment of an energy exploration research vessel in disputed waters in the gas-rich eastern Mediterranean. In December 2020 these prospecting activities led the EU to impose sanctions on Turkish energy officials and threaten wider action, but tensions have eased of late, with Turkey pausing its activities in the disputed waters.
Turkish-US relations have been strained by Turkey's purchase of the Russian-made S-400 defence system in 2019, despite the country's membership of NATO. In response the US introduced sanctions in December 2020, but these are mild and target Turkey's defence procurement agency-cutting the country off from US military hardware and technology. There is a risk that the US will impose stronger sanctions (for instance, if Turkey activates the S-400 defence system). In the worst-case scenario, Turkey could be denied access to inter-national financial institutions, but we expect US policy to continue emphasising the need to keep Turkey in the Western camp.
Given the fragility of the economy and the vulnerability of the lira, Turkey can ill afford deeper rows with the US and the EU-especially as its economy is closely entwined with Europe's. Nevertheless, we do not expect any improvement in Turkey's relations with the EU or the US in 2022-26. Mr Erdogan's tough rhetoric resonates well domestically, and opinion polls show that Turkey's conflicts in its near abroad, including in Azerbaijan, Syria and the eastern Mediterranean, are popular among Turkish voters. As Turkey's economic outlook deteriorates, there is a risk that Mr Erdogan's foreign policy will harden.
Outlook for 2022-26: Policy trends The economic downturn in 2020 led to the biggest credit growth boom in a decade, facilitated by Turkey's state-owned banks and a politicised central bank. This has kept inflation high, owing to the depreciation of the lira against all other major currencies. In November 2020 Mr Erdogan made a step towards policy normality by appointing a former finance minister, Naci Agbal (known for championing orthodox monetary policies), as governor of the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT). However, Mr Erdogan replaced Mr Agbal in March 2021, following a rise in the policy rate from 17% to 19%, damaging financial market sentiment again and adding to the unpredictability of Turkey's policies. The new governor, Sahap Kavcioglu, a former member of parliament and official at Halkbank, a Turkish state bank, shares the president's unorthodox view that high interest rates cause inflation. Since September the main policy rate has been cut by a total of 400 basis points, to 15%, despite accelerating inflation. The cuts are the result of political pressure from Mr Erdogan.
Coronavirus cases are declining; Turkey is reporting 21,539 daily new infections on average in early December, which represents 36% of the peak (reported on April 20th 2021). About 59.6% of the population had been fully vaccinated by early December. However, with the emergence of the Omicron variant, the risk of a new wave of cases in the coming months is high.
Mr Erdogan, who is an ardent supporter of low interest rates and cheap credit, has insisted that the current path of low policy rates will not change. Turkey's economy depends on continuing flows of capital from abroad, including bank lending and investments in Turkish bonds, in order to meet its external debt obligations. However, lenders alarmed at the recent policy direction the country has taken may well seek to reduce their exposure. It has already become expensive for the government and the private sector to borrow from abroad. The longer the current monetary policies remain in force and the market volatility persists, the greater the risk of an eventual foreign-exchange shortage will become. The risk of a balance-of-payments crisis is high.
Turkey's economy has displayed resilience during previous bouts of political instability and market volatility, owing to a prudent approach to the public finances, effective capitalisation of the banking sector, and a dynamic and diversified private sector. However, other shortcomings, such as cronyism and corruption, skills mismatches, and tax evasion, are unlikely to be effectively addressed in the forecast period.
Outlook for 2022-26: Fiscal policy In 2021 we estimate the deficit at 3% of GDP, narrowing from 3.4% of GDP in 2020. The finance minister has reintroduced a more prudent approach to the public finances in an effort to recover policy credibility and reassure investors. Further rises in indirect taxes, a restructuring scheme for tax payments and a rise in corporate income tax to 25% should also benefit the budget.
Ahead of the election in 2023, we expect the deficit to remain wide by historical standards, averaging 3.3% of GDP per year in 2022-23. It will then narrow to an average of 2.6% of GDP in 2024-26 as the government reins in spending to reassure investors. We estimate government debt at 39.4% of GDP at end-2021, and expect it to fall gradually to 32.6% at end-2026.
Outlook for 2022-26: Monetary policy The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the CBT adopted an ultra-loose policy in the early stages of the coronavirus crisis, pushing real rates firmly into negative territory. This helped economic activity to recover via a credit boom, but also contributed to a lira sell-off, a rapid loss of foreign-exchange reserves and high inflation. The CBT then began to raise its main policy rate-the one-week repurchase (repo) rate-again, by a total of 1,075 basis points to 19% between September 2020 and March 2021.
After Mr Kavcioglu was appointed in March 2021, the CBT maintained the repo rate unchanged until September. However, Mr Erdogan pushed the central bank to cut the policy rate in September despite rising inflation and the prospect of global monetary tightening. The MPC decided to lower the headline interest rate again, by 200 basis points to 16%, in October. This was cut further to 15% in November. Real rates are now deep in negative territory.
The CBT is likely to cut the policy rate again in December by 100 basis points. We expect political pressure and slowing inflation to lead to further cuts in 2022-26. However, weak capital flows, and the high risk premium and level of dollarisation will limit rate cuts. Foreign-exchange reserves are rising owing to swap agreements, reserve requirement arrangements, IMF funding and gold from ore. We expect efforts by the bank to limit depreciation of the local currency and a renewed increase in the dollarisation rate of lira deposits to limit growth of foreign-exchange reserves.
Outlook for 2022-26: Economic growth Turkey's economy grew by 1.7% in 2020, making the country one of only two of the G20 group of major economies that recorded growth amid the coronavirus pandemic (the other being China). We estimate real GDP growth at 10% in 2021, driven by expansionary monetary, credit and fiscal policies introduced in response to the pandemic and a revival in export demand. Economic activity held up well and expanded by an annual 12.3% on average in the first nine months of 2021. Annual GDP growth is likely to slow in the last months of 2021, owing to a less favourable baseline and the negative impacts of high inflation and currency volatility.
The government is once again pursuing loose monetary policies in order to boost the economy, and is expected to increase the minimum wage substantially in January. However, the risks associated with these policies, alongside global monetary tightening and the prospect of weaker export demand growth, mean that we expect more modest GDP growth in 2022, of 3.7%. Uncertainties stemming from Turkey's macroeconomic imbalances, the country's economic policy, geopolitics and the coronavirus situation globally pose downside risks. In 2023-26 we forecast average annual growth of 3.4%, which we believe is close to Turkey's medium-term potential, as the country's catch-up potential is considerable, and the economy is competitive.
Outlook for 2022-26: Inflation Inflation has been high in Turkey in recent years, mostly owing to the weakness of the lira against major currencies. The problem has been exacerbated at times by loose monetary policy and mercurial monetary management. In the wake of the CBT's decision to lower the headline interest rate in October, and then again in November, the lira crashed, boosting imported inflation. Annual price growth reached 21.3% in November and is set to accelerate further in the months ahead. Persistent inflationary expectations, high global prices, a loosened monetary policy and a weak lira will keep inflation particularly high, at an estimated annual average of 18.6% in 2021 and 20.7% in 2022-well above the central bank's 5% target. Declining commodity prices, will cause inflation to ease, but we still expect it to average 11.2% in 2023-26 owing to the weakness of the lira against the US dollar. More aggressive monetary policy easing, high currency volatility, supply-side disruptions and rising global oil prices pose risks to this forecast.
Outlook for 2022-26: Exchange rates Turkey is going through a currency crisis. Unlike in the past, the lira's crash has not been caused by issues in the country's economic fundamentals. Instead, the crisis reflects the increasingly erratic decision-making of Mr Erdogan. The already-battered lira tumbled further against major currencies in September after Mr Erdogan pushed the CBT to cut its key interest rate despite rising inflation and the prospect of global monetary tightening. After the latest CBT rate cut in November, and remarks by the president defending low interest rates, the lira soared beyond TL13:US$1 and had reached about TL14.2:US$1 by mid-December.
The current monetary policy is unlikely to change. The CBT has sold foreign currency twice to prevent "unhealthy price formation" in the foreign-exchange market, but to little or no avail. We expect the lira to end the year at TL14.4:US$1. There appear to be no plans to limit access to foreign exchange.
Internal and external imbalances, high inflation, and a gradual normalisation of monetary policy in the US and the euro area will all contribute to a depreciation of the lira against the US dollar in 2022-26 (albeit not to the extent seen in November-December). Policy unpredictability, poor international relations, foreign investors' concerns regarding the central bank's independence and a reliance on short-term capital inflows will also weigh on the currency. As a result, we forecast that the lira will continue to follow a depreciatory path in 2022-26 (weakening by 12.3% in nominal terms on average).
Outlook for 2022-26: External sector We estimate that the current-account deficit will have shrunk to 1% of GDP in 2021, from 4.9% in 2020. The trade deficit has narrowed, whereas the services surplus has increased owing to the partial recovery in tourism. We expect the current-account deficit to remain relatively narrow in 2022-26 as tourism earnings continue to recover. The low-interest policies causing the weakness of the lira may have a limited positive effect on the current account by encouraging exports of goods and services and discouraging imports; however, many imported goods including energy raw materials are essential for the functioning of the economy and/or unavailable domestically. Attracting sufficient capital inflows to cover the deficit and service foreign debt, without drawdowns of foreign-exchange reserves, will be complicated by uncertainties relating to monetary and foreign policy. The sovereign increasingly relies on domestic financing (with support from the central bank), rather than tapping foreign funding sources.
The longer the current policies remain in force and the market volatility persists, the greater the risk of an eventual foreign-exchange shortage will become. The risk of a balance-of-payments crisis is high.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 3.2 2.9 2.3 -3.7 5.4 4.0 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.6
EU27 GDP growth 2.9 2.1 1.8 -6.1 4.8 4.2 2.4 2.1 1.9 1.8
Western Europe growth 2.9 1.9 1.5 -6.1 5.1 4.0 2.3 2.0 1.9 1.8
World trade growth 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 9.0 5.9 4.8 4.1 4.0 3.9
US CPI 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.6 3.8 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2
EU27 CPI 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.5 2.1 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.8
Manufactures export price 1.9 5.1 -1.4 0.8 6.8 1.0 2.1 1.9 2.2 2.3
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 71.7 78.5 66.0 61.0 55.5 53.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 0.1 0.5
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 130.3 134.4 134.6 139.1 143.7 145.7
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Expenditure on GDP (TL bn at current market prices)
GDP 3,122 3,748 4,308 5,019 5,695 6,600 7,811 9,171 10,558 12,145
Private consumption 1,831 2,107 2,449 2,850 3,341 3,826 4,380 5,072 5,869 6,790
Government consumption 449 550 668 764 962 1,187 1,377 1,586 1,792 1,999
Gross fixed investment 933 1,115 1,118 1,373 1,638 1,870 2,116 2,392 2,696 3,038
Exports of goods & services 814 1,159 1,404 1,436 2,329 3,274 4,094 4,895 5,698 6,400
Imports of goods & services 930 1,180 1,295 1,637 2,546 3,523 4,124 4,741 5,464 6,050
Stockbuilding 26 -3 -36 232 -30 -33 -33 -33 -33 -33
Domestic demand 3,239 3,769 4,198 5,219 5,911 6,850 7,841 9,017 10,324 11,794
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 855.9 776.2 759.2 716.1 638.6 546.0 557.9 591.7 625.6 694.0
Private consumption 501.8 436.4 431.6 406.7 374.7 316.5 312.9 327.3 347.8 388.0
Government consumption 123.1 113.9 117.7 109.1 107.9 98.2 98.4 102.3 106.2 114.2
Gross fixed investment 255.7 231.0 197.0 195.9 183.7 154.7 151.2 154.3 159.8 173.6
Exports of goods & services 223.1 240.0 247.5 204.9 261.2 270.8 292.4 315.8 337.7 365.7
Imports of goods & services 255.0 244.5 228.2 233.6 285.4 291.5 294.6 305.9 323.8 345.7
Stockbuilding 7.2 -0.6 -6.3 33.0 -3.4 -2.7 -2.4 -2.1 -2.0 -1.9
Domestic demand 887.7 780.7 739.9 744.7 662.8 566.7 560.0 581.8 611.8 674.0
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 58.6 56.2 56.8 56.8 58.7 58.0 56.1 55.3 55.6 55.9
Government consumption 14.4 14.7 15.5 15.2 16.9 18.0 17.6 17.3 17.0 16.5
Gross fixed investment 29.9 29.8 25.9 27.4 28.8 28.3 27.1 26.1 25.5 25.0
Stockbuilding 0.8 -0.1 -0.8 4.6 -0.5 -0.5 -0.4 -0.4 -0.3 -0.3
Exports of goods & services 26.1 30.9 32.6 28.6 40.9 49.6 52.4 53.4 54.0 52.7
Imports of goods & services 29.8 31.5 30.1 32.6 44.7 53.4 52.8 51.7 51.8 49.8
Memorandum item
National savings ratio (%) 30.7 29.7 25.1 32.0 b 28.2 27.8 26.7 25.7 25.2 24.7
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Real expenditure on GDP (TL bn at constant 2009 prices)
GDP 1,703.2 1,757.8 1,769.8 1,799.4 1,980.0 2,053.2 2,125.6 2,200.3 2,273.8 2,350.2
Private consumption 1,019.0 1,027.2 1,040.7 1,072.9 1,167.4 1,188.9 1,208.0 1,237.1 1,271.7 1,311.9
Government consumption 230.1 245.3 255.7 260.9 277.9 285.1 293.4 303.1 311.6 320.3
Gross fixed investment 502.9 503.7 439.1 469.0 499.5 518.5 538.2 558.1 577.1 596.7
Exports of goods & services 395.8 429.4 449.9 384.3 457.0 490.5 522.6 548.0 573.0 596.7
Imports of goods & services 413.1 391.2 365.2 394.4 428.5 436.5 443.2 454.0 468.0 484.0
Stockbuilding -31.57 -56.57 -50.32 6.62 6.62 6.62 6.62 8.00 8.50 8.50
Domestic demand 1,720.5 1,719.6 1,685.1 1,809.4 1,951.4 1,999.1 2,046.2 2,106.3 2,168.8 2,237.4
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 7.4 3.2 0.7 1.7 10.0 3.7 3.5 3.5 3.3 3.4
Private consumption 5.9 0.8 1.3 3.1 8.8 1.8 1.6 2.4 2.8 3.2
Government consumption 5.2 6.6 4.2 2.1 6.5 2.6 2.9 3.3 2.8 2.8
Gross fixed investment 8.1 0.2 -12.8 6.8 6.5 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.4 3.4
Exports of goods & services 12.4 8.5 4.8 -14.6 18.9 7.3 6.5 4.9 4.6 4.1
Imports of goods & services 10.3 -5.3 -6.7 8.0 8.6 1.9 1.5 2.4 3.1 3.4
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.4 -1.5 0.4 3.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 7.0 -0.1 -2.0 7.4 7.8 2.4 2.4 2.9 3.0 3.2
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 3.6 0.5 0.8 1.8 5.3 1.1 0.9 1.4 1.6 1.8
Government consumption 0.7 0.9 0.6 0.3 0.9 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4
Gross fixed investment 2.4 0.0 -3.7 1.7 1.7 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.9
External balance 0.3 3.3 2.7 -5.4 2.1 1.3 1.2 0.7 0.5 0.3
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Origin of GDP (TL bn at constant 2009 prices)
GDP at factor cost 1509.5 1,559.6 1,574.6 1,587.9 b 1,723.4 1,787.2 1,850.2 1,915.2 1,979.2 2,045.7
Agriculture 106.3 108.5 112.1 118.7 124.0 127.1 130.3 133.6 136.9 140.3
Industry 470.1 472.6 458.7 463.1 482.5 504.3 527.0 550.7 575.4 601.3
Services 933.1 978.5 1,003.8 1,006.1 1,116.9 1,155.8 1,192.9 1,231.0 1,266.8 1,304.0
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 4.9 2.1 3.3 5.9 4.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Industry 9.3 0.5 -2.9 1.0 4.2 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5
Services 7.6 4.9 2.6 0.2 11.0 3.5 3.2 3.2 2.9 2.9
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 6.8 6.4 7.0 7.3 6.9 6.9 6.8 6.7 6.7 6.6
Industry 32.8 32.9 30.3 30.5 28.9 29.1 29.4 29.6 30.0 30.3
Services 60.4 60.7 62.6 62.2 64.2 64.1 63.9 63.6 63.4 63.1
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) 8.7 1.6 -0.6 1.6 17.7 4.6 2.0 2.5 2.3 2.0
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 3.8 1.0 3.0 6.8 7.2 1.2 1.0 1.2 1.1 1.1
Total factor productivity growth 1.8 0.4 2.1 3.2 6.8 0.6 1.4 1.6 1.5 1.5
Growth of capital stock 7.4 6.8 4.3 4.6 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.1 4.0
Growth of potential GDP 6.7 4.2 4.2 1.3 8.6 2.5 4.4 4.4 4.3 3.2
Growth of real GDP 7.4 c 3.2 c 0.7 c 1.7 c 10.0 3.7 3.5 3.5 3.3 3.4
Growth of real GDP per head 5.7 c 1.7 c -0.6 c 0.6 c 9.1 3.1 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.8
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 81.1 82.3 83.4 84.3 a 85.0 85.6 86.0 86.3 86.7 87.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 855.9 776.2 759.2 716.1 a 638.6 546.0 557.9 591.7 625.6 694.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 10,550 9,430 9,100 8,490 a 7,510 6,380 6,490 6,850 7,220 7,960
Private consumption (US$ bn) 501.8 436.4 431.6 406.7 a 374.7 316.5 312.9 327.3 347.8 388.0
Private consumption per head (US$) 6,190 5,300 5,170 4,820 a 4,410 3,700 3,640 3,790 4,010 4,450
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2310.8 2441.9 2502.6 2575.0 2929.7 3123.2 3320.6 3519.8 3713.7 3919.1
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 28,490 29,660 30,000 30,530 34,450 36,500 38,630 40,780 42,830 44,970
Personal disposable income (TL bn) 1,917.5 b 2,206.9 b 2,564.7 b 2,998.0 3,514.6 4,059.4 4,688.6 5,476.2 6,390.8 7,458.0
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 525.6 b 457.1 b 452.0 b 427.8 394.1 335.8 334.9 353.3 378.7 426.2
Growth of real disposable income (%) 5.9 b 0.8 b 1.3 b 3.5 8.8 2.7 2.5 3.3 3.7 4.1
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 1.08 1.09 1.09 1.10 a 1.10 1.09 1.10 1.10 1.11 1.08
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.91 0.88 0.85 0.69 0.56 c 0.54 0.54 0.55 0.58 0.59
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 1.92 1.88 1.97 b 2.08 2.07 c 2.08 2.09 2.10 2.14 2.15
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.98 0.94 0.99 0.99 a 1.09 1.06 1.07 1.08 1.06 1.03
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 21.7 22.2 23.2 24.0 21.8 21.4 21.5 18.7 18.3 17.4
Interest 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.7 3.1 3.3 3.9 3.4 3.1 3.2
Non-interest 19.9 20.2 20.9 21.3 18.7 18.1 17.6 15.4 15.3 14.2
Government revenue 20.2 20.2 20.3 20.5 18.8 18.1 18.3 15.9 15.7 15.1
Budget balance -1.5 -1.9 -2.9 -3.4 -3.0 -3.3 -3.2 -2.9 -2.6 -2.3
Primary balance 0.3 0.0 -0.6 -0.8 0.1 0.0 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.8
Government debt 28.0 30.2 32.7 39.9 39.4 38.6 36.9 35.2 34.0 32.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 3.65 4.83 5.67 7.01 8.92 12.09 14.00 15.50 16.88 17.50
Exchange rate TL:US$ (year-end) 3.78 5.27 5.95 7.35 14.38 13.00 14.50 16.00 17.25 17.00
Exchange rate TL:€ (av) 4.12 5.70 6.35 8.00 10.59 14.08 16.07 18.21 20.50 21.70
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 73.9 b 63.3 b 61.7 b 55.3 47.2 41.4 40.1 39.3 38.5 39.1
Purchasing power parity TL:US$ (av) 1.35 1.53 1.72 1.95 1.94 2.11 2.35 2.61 2.84 3.10
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 15.7 19.1 26.1 36.0 16.5 22.0 22.2 16.5 15.8 14.4
Domestic credit growth (%) 19.0 18.1 16.1 39.0 9.2 19.9 23.9 17.9 15.2 15.0
Lending rate (av; %) 15.7 23.7 20.4 12.9 20.8 18.6 15.5 12.8 11.4 10.6
Deposit rate (av; %) 12.4 18.1 18.8 10.8 18.4 16.9 13.5 10.5 8.8 7.8
3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 12.8 19.8 20.7 11.2 19.1 16.2 14.0 12.8 11.1 9.3
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 31.5 32.2 32.5 30.7 30.8 31.0 31.7 32.4 33.1 33.3
Labour force (% change) 3.5 2.2 0.9 -5.5 0.4 0.6 2.3 2.2 2.1 0.4
Employment (m) 28.1 28.7 28.0 26.7 27.4 28.1 28.8 29.4 30.1 30.7
Employment (% change) 3.5 2.2 -2.3 -4.8 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.3 2.2 2.2
Unemployment (m) 3.4 3.5 4.5 4.0 3.4 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.5
Unemployment rate (%) 10.9 10.9 13.8 13.2 11.7 11.5 11.3 11.2 10.7 10.0
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
Consumer prices (av) 11.1 16.3 15.2 12.3 18.6 20.7 13.3 12.0 10.4 9.0
Consumer prices (year-end) 11.7 20.1 11.8 14.6 22.2 16.6 12.6 11.1 9.7 8.8
Producer prices (av) 15.8 27.0 17.6 12.2 39.9 36.9 26.2 21.6 9.5 7.4
GDP deflator (av) 10.9 16.3 14.2 14.6 b 3.1 11.8 14.3 13.4 11.4 11.3
Private consumption deflator (av) 11.1 14.2 14.7 12.9 7.7 12.4 12.7 13.1 12.6 12.2
Government consumption deflator (av) 10.7 14.8 16.6 12.2 18.2 20.2 12.8 11.5 9.9 8.5
Fixed investment deflator (av) 13.1 19.4 14.9 15.0 12.0 10.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0
Average nominal wages 13.2 b 14.6 b 21.0 b 14.0 b 14.8 14.0 13.0 13.0 13.0 13.0
Average real wages 1.9 b -1.5 b 5.0 b 1.5 b -3.2 -5.6 -0.2 0.9 2.4 3.7
Unit labour costs (TL-based; av) d 11.6 b 16.0 b 20.0 b 9.2 b 9.6 15.2 14.4 14.2 14.3 14.2
Unit labour costs (US$-based) d -7.6 b -12.4 b 2.1 b -11.6 b -13.9 -15.0 -1.2 3.1 4.9 10.2
Labour costs per hour (TL) d 17.9 b 20.5 b 24.8 b 28.2 b 32.4 36.9 41.7 47.2 53.3 60.2
Labour costs per hour (US$) 4.9 b 4.2 b 4.4 b 4.0 b 3.6 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.2 3.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts. d Manufacturing only: public and private sectors.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -40.8 -21.7 5.3 -35.0 -6.7 -10.3 -9.5 -7.4 -7.5 -8.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.8 -2.8 0.7 -4.9 -1.0 -1.9 -1.7 -1.3 -1.2 -1.2
Goods: exports fob 169.2 178.9 182.2 168.4 231.0 242.1 255.1 267.1 274.4 279.1
Goods: imports fob -227.8 -219.6 -199.0 -206.3 -247.0 -255.5 -263.4 -272.8 -280.8 -291.3
Trade balance -58.6 -40.7 -16.8 -37.9 -16.0 -13.4 -8.3 -5.7 -6.4 -12.1
Services: credit 53.5 58.6 62.7 35.4 39.5 39.3 38.8 42.3 46.3 54.3
Services: debit -27.1 -28.5 -28.7 -23.9 -26.3 -26.1 -27.5 -30.8 -33.6 -35.8
Services balance 26.3 30.2 34.1 11.5 13.2 13.1 11.4 11.6 12.7 18.5
Primary income: credit 5.0 6.1 6.3 6.8 10.9 4.3 5.1 4.8 5.1 5.4
Primary income: debit -16.1 -18.1 -19.2 -15.6 -14.8 -14.5 -17.8 -18.0 -18.8 -19.6
Primary income balance -11.1 -11.9 -12.8 -8.8 -4.0 -10.1 -12.6 -13.2 -13.7 -14.1
Secondary income: credit 4.5 2.8 2.7 4.2 3.7 3.2 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.6
Secondary income: debit -2.0 -2.0 -1.9 -4.0 -3.6 -3.1 -3.2 -3.3 -3.5 -3.9
Secondary income balance 2.5 0.8 0.8 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.3
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 91.8 b 94.3 90.3 89.0 b 102.2 103.4 106.8 110.9 113.9 117.7
Export prices (% change) 1.8 b 2.8 -4.3 -1.4 b 14.9 1.2 3.2 3.8 2.7 3.4
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 87.8 b 93.7 89.9 84.3 b 97.4 99.3 99.1 100.4 103.3 106.3
Import prices (% change) 7.4 b 6.7 -4.1 -6.2 b 15.6 2.0 -0.2 1.3 2.9 2.9
Terms of trade (2010=100) 104.5 b 100.7 100.4 105.6 b 104.9 104.1 107.7 110.4 110.2 110.7
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 7.7 b 2.4 b -0.7 b -8.6 b 7.6 6.4 4.3 3.8 3.3 3.2
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ m)
Inward direct investment 11,042 12,822 9,266 7,939 7,000 8,000 9,356 11,067 12,035 12,987
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 1.3 1.7 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.5 1.7 1.9 1.9 1.9
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 4.3 5.6 4.7 4.1 3.8 5.2 6.2 7.2 7.5 7.5
Outward direct investment -2,703 -3,587 -2,943 -3,240 -3,000 -3,200 -2,890 -3,000 -3,145 -3,096
Net foreign direct investment 8,339 9,235 6,323 4,699 4,000 4,800 6,466 8,067 8,890 9,891
Stock of foreign direct investment 180,258 193,080 202,346 210,285 217,285 225,285 234,641 245,708 257,743 270,730
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 2,222 2,345 2,425 2,493 2,555 2,633 2,730 2,847 2,973 3,107
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 21.1 24.9 26.7 29.4 34.0 41.3 42.1 41.5 41.2 39.0
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.51 2.72 0.87 0.76 0.61 0.65 0.72 0.82 0.86 0.89
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.60 0.60 0.59 0.63 0.59 0.57 0.57 0.57 0.57 0.58
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 456.6 446.0 440.8 435.9 a 454.3 465.2 477.7 479.7 485.4 488.1
Total external debt (% of GDP) 53.3 57.5 58.1 60.9 a 71.1 85.2 85.6 81.1 77.6 70.3
Debt/exports ratio (%) 152.6 144.2 132.9 162.1 117.3 120.9 119.6 113.3 110.5 106.4
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 37.9 34.4 34.5 41.2 27.7 26.2 26.6 27.3 25.8 25.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU
Global data Global data
OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
Domestic data GDP growth and components: TurkStat
Population: UN Population database and EIU interpolation
Consumer prices: IMF, IFS; TurkStat
Industrial production: derived from OECD, Main Economic Indicators
Exchange rates and interest rates: IMF, IFS
External trade and balance of payments: IMF, IFS; Central Bank of Turkey; TurkStat
Central government financial balance: IMF, IFS; Turkish Treasury
Foreign direct investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report; Central Bank of Turkey
Abbreviations IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
TurkStat: Turkish Statistical Institute
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development

Subject: Tax rates; Privatization; Macroeconomics; Foreign exchange rates; Coups d'etat; Politics; International relations; Research & development expenditures; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Patronage; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Central banks; Interest rates; Economic growth; COVID-19; Foreign policy; Tax evasion

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Privatization Macroeconomics Foreign exchange rates International relations Research & development expenditures International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Central banks Interest rates Economic growth Tax evasion; Industry: 52111 :‎ Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Location: Turkey; Middle East

People: Erdogan, Recep Tayyip

Company / organization: Name: Justice & Development Party-Turkey; NAICS: 813940

Classification: 52111: Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Identifier / keyword: Turkey; Middle East

Title: Country Forecast Turkey December 2021 Updater

Publication title: Country Forecast. Turkey; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Dec 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09668632

e-ISSN: 20489730

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2713092892

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-turkey-december-2021-updater/docview/2713092892/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-12-20

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Turkey December 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-turkey-december-2021/docview/2673501465/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Turkey&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Turkey+December+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-12-09&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Turkey&amp;rft.issn=02695464&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Turkey; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Turkey; Middle East

Title: Country Report Turkey December 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Turkey; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Dec 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695464

e-ISSN: 20475977

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2673501465

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-turkey-december-2021/docview/2673501465/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-06-07

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Brazil December 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-brazil-december-2021/docview/2671511826/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Brazil&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Brazil+December+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-12-02&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Brazil&amp;rft.issn=02695731&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Brazil; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Brazil; Latin America

Title: Country Report Brazil December 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Brazil; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Dec 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695731

e-ISSN: 20474431

Source type: Report

Language ofpublication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2671511826

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-brazil-december-2021/docview/2671511826/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-05-31

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Chile December 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-chile-december-2021/docview/2671162644/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Chile&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Chile+December+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-12-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Chile&amp;rft.issn=02695197&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Chile; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Chile; Latin America

Title: Country Report Chile December 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Chile; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Dec 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 02695197

e-ISSN: 20474520

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2671162644

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-chile-december-2021/docview/2671162644/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-05-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Serbia December 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-serbia-december-2021/docview/2671162629/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Serbia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Serbia+December+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-12-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Serbia&amp;rft.issn=1756431X&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Serbia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Serbia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Serbia December 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Serbia; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Dec 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 1756431X

e-ISSN: 20475764

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2671162629

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-serbia-december-2021/docview/2671162629/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-05-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Venezuela December 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-december-2021/docview/2671162610/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Venezuela+December+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-12-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=13507133&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Report Venezuela December 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Venezuela; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Dec 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507133

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2671162610

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-december-2021/docview/2671162610/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-05-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Bolivia December 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-bolivia-december-2021/docview/2671162585/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Bolivia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Bolivia+December+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-12-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Bolivia&amp;rft.issn=13564072&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Bolivia; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Bolivia; Latin America

Title: Country Report Bolivia December 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Bolivia; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Dec 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13564072

e-ISSN: 20474407

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2671162585

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-bolivia-december-2021/docview/2671162585/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-05-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Venezuela December 2021 Updater

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-december-2021-updater/docview/2611014147/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: The main risks to our projections for oil production stem from the scale of operational difficulties at local refinery complexes and the less than sanguine long-term outlook for oil prices; both factors will weigh heavily on oil investment. Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 6.5 12.5 5.2 3.2 2.4 2.1 Consumer price inflation (av; %) 1,462 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8 Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.2 -6.6 -7.0 -7.2 -7.5 -7.5 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.4 2.6 2.3 2.1 1.7 1.5 Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 10.1 9.5 14.0 18.3 19.3 18.5 Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (av) 3.4 19.8 78 247 581 1,203 Exchange rate BsD:€1 (av) 4.0 23.0 90 290 706 1,492 Country forecast overview: Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 29.7 Population growth -0.4 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 50.4 Real GDP growth -24.6 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 122.3 Real domestic demand growth -25.2 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,696 Inflation 7,490.5 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,113 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.5 Exchange rate (av) BsD:US$ 0.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.0 a EIU estimates. In January 2016 the politicised Supreme Court declared the legislature to be in contempt of court, blocking all subsequent legislation.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Venezuela+December+2021+Updater&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-12-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=09669574&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - Despite Venezuela's socioeconomic collapse and the ongoing covid-19 pandemic, EIU expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV), to retain power throughout the 2022-26 forecast period. Mr Maduro's position will be supported primarily by his grip over a complex security apparatus and the opposition's lack of de facto power. The Maduro regime has shown itself capable of managing internal dissent through a patronage system that rewards loyalty and its strict control over the security forces.
- We estimate that the Venezuelan economy returned to growth in 2021, after contracting by almost four-fifths in 2014-20. Our benign baseline forecast is that the recovery will continue over the forecast period, with real GDP growth averaging 5.1% in 2022-26. However, the strong top-line growth projections primarily reflect a low base of comparison. Even in 2026, the economy will still be 6% below its pre-pandemic level and 70% below its 2013 peak.
- Our forecasts assume that oil production will continue to recover over the forecast period. The latest data suggest that this is indeed happening as PDVSA (the state-owned oil firm) adapts to wide-ranging US sanctions and expands into new export markets. The main risks to our projections for oil production stem from the scale of operational difficulties at local refinery complexes and the less than sanguine long-term outlook for oil prices; both factors will weigh heavily on oil investment.
- Market opportunities in the non-oil economy will be modest, as the country is still suffering from mass outward migration, growing income and wealth inequality, and extremely restricted access to private-sector credit. Macroeconomic volatility will nevertheless abate to some extent as de facto dollarisation of the economy continues. The government has taken some small steps towards economic liberalisation, including a reduction of price and exchange-rate controls. However, the measures are not a product of economic orthodoxy, but rather of policy decisions to ensure the regime's survival. We do not expect to see the comprehensive economic and institutional reforms that would be required to comprehensively resolve Venezuela's economic crisis within the forecast period.

Country forecast overview: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 6.5 12.5 5.2 3.2 2.4 2.1
Consumer price inflation (av; %) 1,462 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8
Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.2 -6.6 -7.0 -7.2 -7.5 -7.5
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.4 2.6 2.3 2.1 1.7 1.5
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 10.1 9.5 14.0 18.3 19.3 18.5
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (av) 3.4 19.8 78 247 581 1,203
Exchange rate BsD:€1 (av) 4.0 23.0 90 290 706 1,492
Country forecast overview: Business environment rankings                
Value of index a     Global rank b     Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26
2.95 3.19   82 82   12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

- Venezuela ranks 82nd of 82 countries in the global business environment rankings for 2022-26, retaining its bottom spot from the 2017-21 historical period, despite minor improvements in some areas. Comprehensive reforms to institutions, economic policy and the business environment are unlikely.

Country forecast overview: Venezuela's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: Enforcement of price controls remains lax, but risk of state intervention remains high. Corruption and selective application of regulations are common and continue to undermine free competition.
2024-26: Contract rights remain weak, and red tape and ad hoc interventionism continue.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Government efforts to revive foreign investment fail owing to US sanctions and political and economic instability.
2024-26: Investment flows remain low amid ongoing economic volatility. Intellectual property protection and private property rights deteriorate.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: Currency controls are weakened, but access to foreign currency remains limited. US sanctions hamper trade.
2024-26: Efforts to remove trade and capital controls are undertaken on a gradual basis, and de facto dollarisation advances. Domestic supply of foreign currency remains limited as oil prices decline.
Taxes 2022-23: Government explores options to broaden the tax base, but its efforts are impeded by extremely high informality.
2024-26: Tax system remains complex and unwieldy, but risk of discriminatory, ad hoc tax measures declines.
Financing 2022-23: Inflation remains high, and concerns surrounding economic instability restrict financing to only short term.
2024-26: Economic adjustments take time to feed through to solid, sustainable growth in credit to private sector and development of capital markets. Long-term finance remains in short supply.
Labour market 2022-23: Labour laws add substantially to non-wage costs. Firms prohibited from firing workers until end-2022. Ongoing emigration of skilled labour aggravates skills shortages.
2024-26: Labour market rigidities persist despite some increased flexibility in hiring and firing practices.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Underinvestment in water network and electricity grid leads to continued rationing and unpredictable blackouts.
2024-26: Investors remain highly cautious about committing to long-term capital projects. Infrastructure deteriorates even further.
Technological readiness 2022-23: E-government services remain almost non-existent. Telecommunications sector is opened to foreign investment, but with little interest. Local use of cryptocurrency expands among middle- and high-income households.
2024-26: Limited regulatory capacity and years of underinvestment continue to restrict internet and mobile coverage.
Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 29.7 Population growth -0.4
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 50.4 Real GDP growth -24.6
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 122.3 Real domestic demand growth -25.2
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,696 Inflation 7,490.5
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,113 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.5
Exchange rate (av) BsD:US$ 0.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.0
a EIU estimates.
Background: From 1958 until the mid-1990s, two parties-Acción Democrática and the Comité de Organización Política Electoral Independiente-alternated in power. Frequent economic crises and endemic corruption eventually led to a collapse in support for both parties and culminated in the 1998 election of Hugo Chávez, a former lieutenant-colonel and leader of a failed coup in 1992. Mr Chávez's policy programme exacerbated political polarisation, but several attempts to remove him from power before his death in March 2013 proved unsuccessful. His chosen successor, Nicolás Maduro, has seen his own popularity plummet, as his macroeconomic mismanagement-aggravated by wide-ranging US sanctions-has plunged the country into a state of economic collapse.
Political structure: Although Venezuela is nominally a federal republic with separation of powers, the ruling Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV) has systematically eroded institutions. In December 2015 the opposition coalition, Mesa de la Unidad Democrática, won control of the unicameral National Assembly. In January 2016 the politicised Supreme Court declared the legislature to be in contempt of court, blocking all subsequent legislation. In August 2017 a PSUV-only Constituent Assembly (ANC) granted itself control over all legislative matters, becoming the country's de facto legislature and sidelining the National Assembly. The ANC was dissolved at end-2020, after the PSUV and its allies regained control of the legislature in an election that was widely regarded as rigged.
Policy issues: The most pressing policy issue is the need to stabilise the crisis-ridden economy. The monetisation of vast public deficits has created an ever-increasing excess of domestic currency, triggering hyperinflation. Mismanagement of PDVSA (the state-owned oil company and originator of practically all foreign-currency inflows into the country) has resulted in a sharp contraction in oil production. Attempts to address these problems through distortionary price and currency controls proved actively counter-productive and led to major shortages of both foreign currency and basic goods. The scarcity of foreign exchange also led to arrears on most of the external debt issued by the sovereign and state-owned firms. The Maduro regime is now changing tack and pursuing incremental pro-market reforms, but its efforts are hindered by hugely distortionary economic imbalances, a lack of confidence in the legal framework and wide-ranging US sanctions.
Taxation: The top corporate tax rate is 34% for non-oil companies and 50% for oil firms. The value-added tax (VAT) rate stands at 12%.
Foreign trade: EIU estimates that the goods trade surplus fell to US$10.8bn in 2019, amid a long-term decline in oil exports. We estimate that the trade account deteriorated further in 2020, shifting to a US$1.8bn deficit.
Major exports 2018 % of total Major imports 2013 % of total
Petroleum 88.7 Intermediate goods 56.5
Other 11.3 Capital goods 24.2
    Consumer goods 19.3
       
Main destinations of exports 2019 % of total Main origins of imports 2019 % of total
India 30.0 China 31.6
UAE 13.8 US 19.0
Malaysia 2.9 Brazil 7.9
Aruba 2.1 India 6.5
Outlook for 2022-26: Political stability EIU expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV, the Chavistas), to remain in power throughout the 2022-26 forecast period, despite having fomented the country's ongoing socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis. A number of factors underpin our forecast; particularly significant is the regime's strict control over the military, the police and paramilitary forces. This control, which depends on a patronage structure that rewards high-ranking officials and a disciplinary system that severely punishes insubordination, will allow the regime to manage internal dissent.
Having consolidated power over the years, the Chavistas have unchecked authority over all branches of government. Political control is nominally disputed by Juan Guaidó, the leader of the Plataforma Unitaria (PU) opposition alliance and self-declared interim president, but the opposition lacks de facto power. Mr Guaidó retains the backing of most Western powers, including the US, which he has used to co-ordinate a "maximum pressure" campaign (involving wide-ranging economic sanctions) against the Maduro regime. However, with these hardline tactics failing to deliver results-and in some cases proving counterproductive-domestic support for Mr Guaidó has waned.
Against this backdrop, in August the Maduro regime and the opposition began new talks aimed at overcoming the long-running political détente. However, the asymmetry in incentives and bargaining power between the sides-along with deep mutual distrust-are preventing a quick solution. In October the political dialogue entered a state of limbo, after the Chavistas stepped back from the negotiating table in protest at the US's detention of a Colombian businessman, Alex Saab, who is a close ally of Mr Maduro. Although talks could still resume, the balance of risks is tilted towards continued stalemate.
There are risks to our assumption that Mr Maduro will remain in power over the medium term. For instance, we do not discount the possibility of a negotiated transition if substantial progress is made in the political dialogue. An agreement on the reimposition of presidential term limits could potentially create a political opening in 2024, when Mr Maduro's term ends. Another possibility is that Mr Maduro is deposed through an internal coup, which could materialise in the event of an unexpected breakdown in the regime's patronage system (which is heavily reliant on revenue from PDVSA, the state-owned oil firm). At present, neither scenario is particularly likely.
In this context, the biggest political challenges facing the regime will be those of its own making, rather than those posed by the political opposition. As institutional corruption has risen, the Maduro regime has forged pacts with various armed groups, either out of political convenience or to tap new, illicit revenue streams. However, several of these agreements have now broken down, leading to violent turf wars across Venezuela. Although these criminal groups lack the resources to challenge the regime outright, they will undermine the enforcement of law and order in the country.
Outlook for 2022-26: Election watch On November 21st Venezuela will hold regional and local elections to choose governors, mayors and their legislative counterparts. The Maduro regime has taken several steps to give the upcoming polls more legitimacy. For instance, it has appointed two opposition representatives to the five-member board of the electoral council, renewed voter rolls and invited international observers-including the EU and the UN-to oversee the elections.
Although the playing field remains heavily tilted in the PSUV's favour, these electoral concessions have paved the way for increased opposition participation in the November polls. However, in our view, even with semi-competitive elections, the PU will struggle to make inroads into regional and local govern-ments. This is partly due to divisions within the diverse opposition coalition, but it also reflects a significant disconnect between the PU leadership and the public-a problem exacerbated by years of electoral boycotts by the opposition. Against this backdrop, we consider the PSUV's dominance at the sub-national level to be fairly safe.
Outlook for 2022-26: International relations The regime's main foreign policy challenge will be to facilitate a rapprochement with the US that is compatible with its own survival. Following a conflict-ridden relationship with the previous US government, Mr Maduro will try to reset bilateral ties under the current president, Joe Biden. We expect little progress to be made; US policy towards Venezuela has bipartisan support in the US, and Mr Biden is unlikely to provide significant sanctions relief unless the Maduro regime makes major political compromises and commits to democratic reform (both of which are highly improbable). Any changes to US sanctions policy will therefore be only on humanitarian grounds and aimed at improving the lives of the poorest Venezuelans, in the same vein as recent exemptions granted for pandemic-related transactions and imports of liquefied petroleum gas.
Venezuela's relations with its allies will be defined largely by ideological and geopolitical alignment, rather than mutual economic benefit. Russia and China have previously extended major financial support, but this has been scaled back in recent years, as Venezuela has been haphazard in making its repay-ments. Instead, Venezuela will increase its reliance on Iran, which has become a major backer of the regime. Iranian assistance has taken various forms in recent months, including intermittent fuel shipments (to alleviate Venezuela's petrol shortages), knowledge-sharing (to evade international sanctions) and technical assistance (to help PDVSA to repair its refinery complexes). However, faced with its own economic constraints, Iran will be unable to provide Venezuela with significant financing or investment.
Outlook for 2022-26: Policy trends The Maduro regime will find it difficult to put the economy back on a more sustainable footing, and it is currently veering from crisis to crisis. In the immediate term, the government's policy priorities will be to contain the public health calamity caused by covid-19 and to alleviate ongoing diesel shortages.
Despite the fact that Venezuela has not fully emerged from a second wave of covid-19 infections that took hold in the second quarter of 2021, the government has decided to move ahead with a relaxation of quarantine measures. We believe that this is largely politically motivated, aimed at creating a veneer of normality ahead of the November elections. However, with the vaccine rollout making little progress-as at November 5th only 32% of the population had been fully vaccinated-the government will probably be forced to tighten restrictions intermittently in order to reduce pressure on the country's decrepit medical infrastructure. We do not expect enough vaccine doses to be distributed to have a significant impact on local transmission until 2023.
The government will make greater progress on alleviating diesel shortages, largely owing to a newly signed oil swap agreement between PDVSA and its Iranian counterpart, the National Iranian Oil Company. The deal will provide Venezuela with light condensate, which is essential for producing diesel. However, the uptick in diesel production is likely to be constrained by severe operational difficulties at important refineries. As a result, a black market for diesel is likely to remain, as is the risk of domestic supply-chain disruptions. We believe that a longer-term remedy will hinge on the Biden administration reinstating exemptions on crude-for-diesel swaps. We expect that to happen by early 2022, but risks to this assumption are high.
Regarding the broader policy goal of promoting economic recovery, we expect GDP to finally stop falling in the forecast period (following seven years of contraction) as oil production stabilises and then ticks up slightly. However, we do not believe that the government will be willing or able to undertake the deep reforms needed to secure a stable and sustained recovery. The businesses that have survived years of capital destruction, brain drain, hyperinflation and suffocating government regulations have done so by adapting their models to the changing circumstances. More often than not, this has involved a down-sizing of personnel, increased informality and reduced profitability.
With the public sector completely overstretched, the government is betting on the private sector to drive the economic recovery. To that end, it has passed an anti-blockade law, which gives the executive branch the unchecked authority to sign new deals with private firms and countries confidentially (in order to skirt international sanctions), without going through public tender processes. Concurrently, the regime is working on a hydrocarbons reform that would incentivise increased private-sector participation in the oil industry. However, these efforts are unlikely to yield significant results; even assuming that the regime manages to sidestep financial sanctions, it will struggle to attract new investment, given the abysmal business environment and lack of confidence in the rule of law.
Outlook for 2022-26: Fiscal policy The authorities have not published complete data on the fiscal accounts since 2011. However, we expect that a high level of inefficient current expenditure, combined with an extremely weak revenue intake, will keep the budget deficit wide and the public debt/GDP ratio above 300% throughout the forecast period. The sovereign's ongoing default on most of its interest and principal repayments will continue to prevent access to external finance, leaving the regime reliant on monetisation to fund its deficits. Even if the government reaches an agreement with some of its creditors (including China) to restructure debt liabilities in 2022-26, we still expect the public debt burden to remain huge, particularly as considerable off-balance-sheet debt financing-mainly PDVSA-issued debt and development funds-understate the true size of total public liabilities.
Outlook for 2022-26: Monetary policy Monetary policy will remain subservient to fiscal policy as the Banco Central de Venezuela (BCV, the central bank) continues to print money to meet the public sector's financing needs. However, in recent years the BCV has taken steps to control growth of monetary aggregates. For instance, it lifted the cash reserve ratio (CRR) from 21.5% in late 2018 to 93% in early 2020, although it has relaxed the CRR slightly since then, to 85% currently. However, far from taming inflation, these measures have only led to the destruction of private-sector credit, which stands at less than 1% of levels recorded four years ago. These factors have accelerated the trend towards wider use of the US dollar in the economy; about two-thirds of financial transactions now take place in dollars.
Outlook for 2022-26: Economic growth Following a steep depression in 2014-20 (when real GDP contracted by a cumulative 77%), Venezuela is poised for a mild economic upswing in 2021-26. However, this upturn will still leave GDP well below its historical peaks.
Reflecting the decimation of the non-oil economy, Venezuela's economic growth is strongly correlated with oil production and exports, prospects for which have improved slightly. Having plummeted to 500,000 barrels/day in 2020-the lowest level in decades-we estimate that oil output increased modestly in 2021, to about 540,000 b/d. There are only 25 active oil rigs in the country-virtually unchanged from 2020 and substantially below a peak of 95 in early 2012. Moreover, there are few incentives to bring new rigs online in the near term. Venezuela's average (after tax) break-even price is currently about US$49/barrel. However, US sanctions on the regime raise the risks involved in dealing with Venezuela, forcing the country to offer a hefty discount on its crude. Therefore, at current market prices (Venezuela's oil basket was trading at US$62.7/b in October), there is only a modest profit to be made from new investment.
We expect real GDP growth to accelerate, from an estimated 6.5% in 2021 to 12.5% in 2022, assuming that oil prices remain supportive and that producers continue to adapt to post-sanctions export markets. Although this appears to be a sharp rebound, it largely reflects a low base of comparison and does not indicate a substantive recovery in the real economy. For instance, we forecast oil output at just 600,000 b/d in 2022, which is significantly below the pre-depression level of 2.5m b/d in 2012.
The recovery is likely to stagnate in the medium term. Serious operational problems, a limited pool of buyers of Venezuelan crude and the weak long-term fundamentals of the oil market will cause growth to taper off towards the end of our forecast period. The non-oil economy will make some modest gains, assuming that continued dollarisation engenders relative macroeconomic stability. However, weak fundamentals and a poor policy environment will keep market opportunities subdued. Consequently, we expect real GDP to remain below pre-pandemic levels even in 2026.
Outlook for 2022-26: Inflation A severely reduced domestic goods supply, constraints on import capacity and the monetisation of large public deficits will impede the disinflationary process throughout 2022-26. The regime has shown little inclination to take on the structural reforms that would address the root causes of inflation. Despite this, an ongoing process of informal dollarisation means that the bolívar will increasingly lose its relevance in price setting, which will help to ease inflationary pressures over time. In fact, we expect Venezuela to exit hyper-inflation in 2023, as monthly inflation will be below 50% for 12 consecutive months. Nevertheless, the extent of dollarisation in the economy will eventually level off, as we expect the public sector to continue using the bolívar, given the government's reliance on seigniorage revenue. Consequently, inflation will remain chronically high, even in the second half of our outlook period.
Outlook for 2022-26: Exchange rates On October 1st the BCV carried out its third currency redenomination in 13 years, with the new bolívar digital replacing the bolívar soberano at a rate of BsD1:BsS1m. Although the measure is ostensibly part of the BCV's pivot towards digitisation, the authorities have confirmed that they will continue to issue fiat money. In our view, the redenomination is largely cosmetic; although it will help to simplify book-keeping for a while, it will not fundamentally engender confidence in the currency, especially in the context of sustained debt monetisation. As a result, dollarisation will remain entrenched in the economy.
In real, trade-weighted terms, the bolívar is hugely overvalued relative to its historical average. This is a result of currency undershooting: during episodes of hyperinflation, prices tend to respond more rapidly than exchange rates to monetary expansion. The resulting real currency appreciation has wide-ranging implications for the economy. For consumers who are increasingly transacting in US dollars, it means that the cost of living is extremely high. Indeed, going by The Economist's Big Mac index (a currency comparison tool), Venezuela is one of the most expensive countries in the world in purchasing power parity terms. For businesses, meanwhile, currency overvaluation means that goods produced locally are simply not competitive by international standards. Assuming that inflation edges down over time, the weak fundamentals of the bolívar should produce renewed real depreciation in the medium term. Although there is considerable uncertainty around the future of the bolívar-bearing in mind the authorities' inability to tackle inflation or real currency appreciation for several years now-our basic assumption is that unwinding years of currency over-valuation will be a slow process.
Outlook for 2022-26: External sector Balance-of-payments pressures will remain severe in 2022-26, contributing to goods shortages and economic inequities. The BCV reported that reserves stood at US$11.1bn as at end-October, but this figure includes an expansion of IMF special drawing rights (SDRs), to which the authorities have no access. In reality, reserves are closer to US$6bn-their lowest level in three decades.
Under our baseline forecast, we expect reserves to rise modestly over the forecast period, averaging US$7.5bn in 2022-26. This increase will be driven largely by trends on the current account, as Venezuela's access to foreign capital will remain extremely limited. We expect the current-account surplus to widen from an estimated 0.5% of GDP in 2021 to an average of 1.8% of GDP in 2022-26. Crucially, our forecasts assume that export earnings will recover from a nadir in 2020. We also expect workers' remittances from abroad to play a significant role in propping up the current-account balance.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions
World GDP growth (%) 3.2 2.9 2.3 -3.7 5.4 4.0 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.6
US GDP growth (%) 2.3 2.9 2.3 -3.4 5.5 3.8 2.2 1.9 2.0 1.8
Latin America growth (%) 0.9 0.8 -0.5 -7.0 6.5 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4
World trade growth (%) 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 9.0 5.9 4.8 4.1 4.0 3.9
US CPI (%) 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.6 3.8 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2
EU27 CPI (%) 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.5 2.1 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.8
Industrial raw materials export price (%) 20.2 2.2 -8.6 -3.2 39.0 1.5 -0.4 -13.8 0.8 1.1
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 71.7 78.5 66.0 61.0 55.5 53.5
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (%) 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.2 1.1 2.0 2.2 2.4
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 130.3 134.4 134.6 139.1 143.7 145.7
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Expenditure on GDP (BsD bn at current market prices)
GDP 0.00 0.01 0.81 16.18 250.1 1,855 7,438 22,751 52,473 106,200
Private consumption 0.00 0.01 0.37 10.49 172.6 1,305 5,239 16,551 38,860 81,859
Government consumption 0.00 0.00 0.21 6.22 99.7 747 2,951 9,010 20,564 41,929
Gross fixed investment 0.00 0.00 0.09 1.78 30.1 273 1,197 3,824 8,919 18,723
Exports of goods & services 0.00 0.00 0.44 5 91 650 2,343 7,123 16,101 33,287
Imports of goods & services 0.00 0.01 0.28 7 141 1,111 4,277 13,734 31,945 69,570
Stockbuilding 0.00 0.00 -0.02 0 -2 -8 -16 -24 -27 -28
Domestic demand 0.00 0.01 0.65 18 300 2,316 9,372 29,362 68,317 142,483
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 139.3 97.6 59.7 50.4 74.5 93.9 94.7 92.3 90.3 88.3
Private consumption 139.9 71.9 27.1 32.7 51.4 66.0 66.7 67.1 66.8 68.0
Government consumption 12.5 16.4 15.6 19.4 29.7 37.8 37.6 36.5 35.4 34.9
Gross fixed investment 22.9 15.8 6.5 5.5 9.0 13.8 15.3 15.5 15.3 15.6
Exports of goods & services 42.8 48.6 32.6 15.9 27.2 32.9 29.8 28.9 27.7 27.7
Imports of goods & services 50.7 53.2 20.8 22.2 42.1 56.2 54.5 55.7 55.0 57.8
Stockbuilding -28.1 -1.9 -1.2 -1.0 -0.7 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 147.2 102.2 48.0 56.7 89.4 117.2 119.4 119.1 117.5 118.4
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 100.5 73.7 45.3 64.9 69.0 70.3 70.4 72.8 74.1 77.1
Government consumption 9.0 16.8 26.1 38.4 39.9 40.2 39.7 39.6 39.2 39.5
Gross fixed investment 16.5 16.2 10.9 11.0 12.0 14.7 16.1 16.8 17.0 17.6
Stockbuilding -20.2 -1.9 -2.1 -1.9 -1.0 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1 -0.1 0.0
Exports of goods & services 30.7 49.8 54.5 31.6 36.5 35.1 31.5 31.3 30.7 31.3
Imports of goods & services 36.4 54.6 34.8 43.9 56.4 59.9 57.5 60.4 60.9 65.5
Memorandum items
Oil production ('000 b/d) 1,925 1,432 a 827 a 505 538 599 620 640 660 680
National savings ratio (%) -9.9 b 14.0 8.1 4.6 7.1 8.0 8.0 8.2 7.6 7.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Real expenditure on GDP (BsD m at constant 1997 market prices)
GDP 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Private consumption 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Government consumption 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Gross fixed investment 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Exports of goods & services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Imports of goods & services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Stockbuilding 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Domestic demand 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP -15.7 -19.6 -37.3 -31.0 6.5 12.5 5.2 3.2 2.4 2.1
Private consumption -16.2 -20.1 -38.0 -24.4 5.3 12.5 5.3 3.8 2.7 2.4
Government consumption -7.2 -9.1 -26.8 -21.0 3.0 12.2 5.0 2.0 2.0 1.5
Fixed investment -45.3 -37.5 -50.0 -30.0 8.5 35.0 15.0 5.0 2.0 2.0
Exports of goods & services 0.0 -10.8 -27.7 -27.4 5.8 11.7 4.8 3.4 3.2 2.6
Imports of goods & services -34.7 0.3 -19.0 6.5 3.0 17.0 7.7 4.0 3.0 2.5
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -2.4 1.9 1.3 1.0 0.8 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand -21.1 -18.2 -35.7 -23.2 5.5 14.1 6.0 3.5 2.5 2.1
Real contribution to growth (%)
Private consumption -11.2 -13.8 -26.1 -16.5 3.9 9.2 3.9 2.8 2.0 1.7
Government consumption -1.5 -2.1 -6.9 -6.3 1.0 4.1 1.7 0.7 0.7 0.5
Gross fixed investment -7.0 -3.8 -3.9 -1.9 0.5 2.2 1.2 0.4 0.2 0.2
External balance 6.4 -1.8 -1.7 -7.3 0.2 -3.3 -1.7 -0.7 -0.4 -0.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Origin of GDP (BsD m at constant 1997 prices)
GDP at factor cost 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Industry 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture -16.5 -16.3 -35.0 -30.0 5.0 8.0 3.0 2.5 2.5 2.5
Industry -23.2 -30.7 -28.0 -20.0 -4.0 12.0 5.0 2.0 1.0 1.0
Services -12.1 -15.2 -40.5 -35.5 11.9 13.0 5.3 3.8 3.0 2.5
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 2.9 3.1 b 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0
Industry 28.4 24.5 b 28.1 32.6 29.4 29.2 29.2 28.8 28.4 28.1
Services 68.7 72.4 b 68.7 64.2 67.5 67.7 67.8 68.2 68.6 68.9
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity
Labour productivity growth (% -20.2 -22.9 4.6 6.2 1.4 2.3 -1.7 -1.7 0.4 0.1
Total factor productivity growth (%) -16.1 -19.1 -8.0 -5.0 6.5 9.3 3.9 3.2 4.4 4.0
Growth of capital stock (%) -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0
Growth of potential GDP (%) -15.0 -19.0 -27.7 -8.4 1.3 7.6 1.6 1.0 2.1 1.7
Growth of GDP (%) -15.7 c -19.6 c -37.3 -31.0 6.5 12.5 5.2 3.2 2.4 2.1
Growth of GDP per head (%) -16.8 -20.6 -33.3 -31.0 9.3 13.4 6.0 4.0 3.2 2.8
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 31.2 b 31.6 29.7 29.7 29.0 28.8 28.5 28.3 28.1 27.9
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 139.3 97.6 59.7 50.4 74.5 93.9 94.7 92.3 90.3 88.3
GDP (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 9 92 56.3 48.1 73.1 92.0 92.9 90.5 89.4 87.4
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 4,461 b 3,086 2,008 1,696 2,572 3,264 3,320 3,258 3,210 3,164
GDP per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 275 2,918 1,894 1,616 2,521 3,200 3,254 3,194 3,179 3,132
Private consumption (US$ bn) 139.9 71.9 27.1 32.7 51.4 66.0 66.7 67.1 66.8 68.0
Private consumption (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 9 68 25.5 31.2 50.4 64.7 65.4 65.8 66.2 67.4
Private consumption per head (US$) 4,480 b 2,270 910 1,100 1,780 2,300 2,340 2,370 2,380 2,440
Private consumption per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 276 2,151 858 1,048 1,740 2,251 2,292 2,324 2,354 2,414
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 333.2 274.3 175.1 122.3 134.7 155.9 168.3 178.0 186.1 193.9
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 10,670 b 8,670 5,890 4,110 4,650 5,420 5,900 6,280 6,620 6,950
Personal disposable income (BsD bn) 0.00 b 0.01 0.41 11.33 186 1,421 5,731 18,062 42,258 88,966
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 155.4 b 81.4 30.6 35.3 55.5 71.9 73.0 73.3 72.7 74.0
Growth of real disposable income (%) -16.2 b -18.6 -38.1 -27.7 5.3 13.5 5.8 3.6 2.3 2.3
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.42 b 0.42 0.39 0.39 0.37 0.37 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.35
Share of world GDP (%; market exchange rates) 0.17 0.11 0.07 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.09 0.08 0.08 0.07
Share of world GDP (%; PPP) 0.28 0.22 0.13 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.11 0.11 0.10 0.11
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.20 0.18 a 0.09 0.03 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.04
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
NFPS expenditure 40.3 47.4 24.6 19.8 23.8 26.5 26.8 26.5 26.4 26.4
Interest 0.9 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.8 0.5 0.4 0.4
Non-interest expenditure 39.4 46.4 24.4 19.7 23.5 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0
NFPS revenue 17.5 16.9 16.7 14.8 16.6 19.9 19.8 19.3 18.9 18.9
NFPS balance -22.8 -30.5 -7.9 -5.0 -7.2 -6.6 -7.0 -7.2 -7.5 -7.5
Primary balance -21.9 -29.5 -7.7 -4.9 -6.9 -6.1 -6.2 -6.7 -7.1 -7.1
Government debt 35.9 180.8 232.8 304.1 316.9 327.5 334.1 345.6 357.5 369.1
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (av) 0.0000 0.0001 0.0135 0.3207 3.36 20 78 247 581 1,203
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (end-period) 0.0000 0.0006 0.0445 1.0673 6.04 34 138 374 787 1,653
Parallel exchange rate BsD:US$ (av) 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0003 0.003 0.02 0.08 0.25 0.59 1.22
Exchange rate BsD:€1 (av) 0.0000 0.0001 0.0152 0.3660 3.98 23 90 290 706 1,492
Exchange rate BsD:€1 (end-period) 0.0000 0.0007 0.0500 1.3097 7.01 39 158 447 967 2,066
Real effective exchange rate (av) CPI-based 2,321.8 3,288.5 4,291 6,788 9,914 11,096 10,392 9,790 9,256 8,924
Real effective exchange rate (av) PPI-based 36.7 51.3 66.7 102.9 152.8 171.1 159.7 149.4 140.3 134.4
Real effective exchange rate (av) ULC-based 58.8 6.3 2.3 2.6 4.1 5.0 4.8 4.7 4.4 4.2
Purchasing power parity BsD:US$1 (av) 0.00 c 0.00 0.00 0.13 1.86 11.90 44 128 282 548
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 1,170.0 c 63,281.9 c 4,945.6 c 1,286.8 c 1,102.6 638.7 299.0 204.4 130.6 102.2
Domestic credit growth (%) 593.0 110,873.9 2,155.5 1,550.8 1,534.9 859.5 313.2 208.4 133.8 103.5
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 21.1 c 22.3 c 28.7 c 13.5 c 10.1 9.5 14.0 18.3 19.3 18.5
Deposit interest rate (%; av) 14.7 c 14.6 c 30.6 c 52.9 c 43.9 27.0 19.0 15.3 14.3 13.5
Money market interest rate (%; av) 0.5 c 5.0 c 110.0 c 182.2 c 240.1 72.5 40.0 31.3 27.5 25.0
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 15.1 15.7 11.5 11.4 10.9 11.0 11.0 11.1 11.1 11.1
Labour force (% change) 5.5 3.9 -26.5 -1.5 -4.2 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2
Employment (m) 14.0 14.6 8.8 5.7 6.0 6.6 7.0 7.4 7.5 7.7
Employment (% change) -10.0 -20.0 -40.0 -35.0 5.0 10.0 7.0 5.0 2.0 2.0
Unemployment (m) 1.1 1.1 2.8 5.7 4.9 4.4 4.0 3.7 3.6 3.4
Unemployment rate (%) 7.2 6.9 24.0 49.8 45.0 40.3 36.3 33.3 32.1 30.9
Wage and price inflation (%)
Consumer prices (av) 982.8 1,005,130.7 17,365.2 3,634.1 1,461.5 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8
Consumer prices (end-period) 2,581.8 1,699,183.5 7,374.4 3,713.3 898.5 512.1 249.8 171.0 112.9 101.2
Producer prices (av) 1,026.0 1,005,130.7 17,365.2 3,634.1 1,461.5 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8
GDP deflator (av) 748.1 c 608,214.5 13,026.4 2,797.4 1,351.6 559.0 281.3 196.3 125.2 98.3
Private consumption deflator (av) 899.2 c 448,578.1 8,065.0 3,688.4 1,461.5 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8
Government consumption deflator (av) 646.3 c 1,005,125.2 17,358.4 3,627.8 1,456.7 567.5 276.5 199.3 123.8 100.9
Fixed investment deflator (av) 1,495.4 c 768,137.6 11,044.3 2,770.1 1,461.5 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8
Average nominal wages 816.7 58,631.0 5,000.0 2,800.0 1,539.6 645.8 294.6 210.9 132.8 108.7
Average real wages -15.3 -94.2 -70.8 -22.3 5.0 11.0 3.5 2.2 1.8 1.4
Unit labour costs (BsD-based) 1,048.7 76,072.1 4,777.9 2,630.7 1,516.7 629.0 301.4 216.2 131.8 108.5
Unit labour costs (US$-based) -14.6 -89.1 -63.7 15.3 54.5 23.8 1.1 0.7 -1.7 0.8
Labour costs per hour (BsD m) 0.00000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.00 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Labour costs per hour (US$) 1.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 6.8 c 9.0 c 6.1 -2.7 0.3 2.4 2.2 2.0 1.6 1.3
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.9 c 9.2 10.1 -5.4 0.4 2.6 2.3 2.1 1.7 1.5
Goods: exports fob 34.0 c 33.7 c 17.4 5.5 10.2 13.6 12.6 11.9 11.6 11.4
Goods: imports fob -12.0 c -12.8 c -6.5 -7.2 -9.7 -11.4 -10.9 -10.3 -10.3 -10.4
Trade balance 22.0 c 20.9 c 10.8 -1.8 0.5 2.2 1.7 1.6 1.3 1.0
Services: credit 1.1 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Services: debit -6.7 -6.4 -5.4 -3.5 -3.8 -4.3 -4.6 -4.9 -5.1 -5.2
Services balance -5.6 c -5.7 c -5.0 -3.2 -3.4 -3.9 -4.1 -4.3 -4.5 -4.5
Primary income: credit 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6
Primary income: debit -10.9 -9.1 -4.0 -2.4 -2.4 -2.7 -2.9 -3.2 -3.5 -3.7
Primary income balance -10.3 c -8.2 c -3.6 -2.2 -2.2 -2.3 -2.3 -2.7 -2.9 -3.1
Secondary income: credit 0.8 2.3 3.8 4.5 5.5 6.4 7.0 7.4 7.7 8.0
Secondary income: debit -0.2 -0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1
Secondary income balance 0.6 c 2.0 c 3.8 4.5 5.5 6.4 6.9 7.3 7.7 7.9
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 45.8 58.3 54.1 36.4 58.7 63.6 55.1 51.6 47.9 46.6
Export prices (% change) -49.1 27.4 -7.3 -32.8 61.5 8.3 -13.4 -6.4 -7.1 -2.6
Import price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 276.1 288.8 139.1 139.2 256.5 293.3 263.8 259.3 248.3 255.0
Import prices (% change) 8.6 4.6 -51.8 0.1 84.3 14.3 -10.1 -1.7 -4.2 2.7
Terms of trade (2005=100) 16.6 20.2 38.9 26.1 22.9 21.7 20.9 19.9 19.3 18.3
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 7.5 6.1 -1.6 -7.2 11.2 5.6 5.9 4.6 4.4 4.5
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment -0.1 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 1.1 1.0 1.0
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 0.0 0.9 1.6 1.9 1.3 1.1 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.1
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) -0.3 5.6 14.3 17.3 10.9 7.3 7.9 6.9 6.5 6.1
Outward direct investment -2.2 -0.7 -0.7 -0.5 -0.6 -0.6 -0.6 -0.7 -0.7 -0.7
Net foreign direct investment -2.3 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3
Stock of inward direct investment 30.1 31.0 31.9 32.9 33.9 34.9 36.1 37.2 38.2 39.1
Stock of inward direct investment per head (US$) 964.4 980.4 1,073.3 1,105.5 1,168.8 1,212.9 1,264.2 1,311.7 1,357.0 1,401.3
Stock of inward direct investment (% of GDP) 21.6 31.8 53.4 65.2 45.4 37.2 38.1 40.3 42.3 44.3
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.00 0.19 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.07
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.10 0.10 0.09 0.10 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.08
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 176.1 c 182.9 c 185.6 c 189.3 c 191.2 193.6 193.2 192.8 191.4 190.5
Total external debt (% of GDP) 126.5 187.5 310.6 375.3 256.6 206.2 203.9 208.9 212.1 215.8
Total external debt (% of GDP, at parallel exchange rate) 2,050.0 c 198.3 c 329.5 c 393.8 c 261.7 210.3 208.0 213.1 214.2 218.0
Debt/exports ratio (%) 490.8 511.2 976.4 2,750.2 1,613.4 1,224.9 1,279.2 1,323.9 1,326.6 1,322.2
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 12.5 13.5 0.2 13.5 0.8 0.4 2.2 3.7 3.5 3.9
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data; EIU is the source for all forecast data unless otherwise stated
Global data Oil prices: dated Brent
US and OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
US and OECD growth: OECD
US 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
US$ effective exchange rate: IMF, IFS; nominal weighted index
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
Domestic data Balance of payments, exchange and interest rates: IMF, IFS
Budget balance: non-financial public sector
Commercial banks' prime lending rate: average nominal interest rate charged on loans to agriculture
Deposit interest rate: average nominal interest rate on 90-day term deposits
Exchange rate: IMF, IFS; market rates expressed as BsD:US$
External debt; World Bank, International Debt Statistics
GDP: at constant 1997 prices, BCV
Inflation: BCV, consumer price index (1997=100) for the Caracas metropolitan area
Labour market statistics: derived from a series given in ILO, Yearbook of Labour Statistics
Oil production and export volumes: Bloomberg
Population: Centro Latinoamericano y Caribeño de Demografía (Celade, Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre)
Social indicators: World Bank, World Development Indicators
Stock of foreign investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report
Abbreviations BCV: Banco Central de Venezuela (the central bank)
IFS: International Financial Statistics
ILO: International Labour Organisation
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development

Subject: Tax rates; Economic forecasts; Macroeconomics; Contempt of court; Exports; Legislatures; Foreign exchange rates; Electricity distribution; Politics; Pandemics; Sanctions; Foreign investment; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Patronage; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Petroleum production; Tax reform; Wage & price controls; Labor market; COVID-19; Volatility; Economic crisis

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Economic forecasts Macroeconomics Exports Forei gn exchange rates Sanctions Foreign investment International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Petroleum production Tax reform Wage & price controls Labor market Volatility Economic crisis; Industry: 92112 :‎ Legislative Bodies

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Classification: 92112: Legislative Bodies

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Forecast Venezuela December 2021 Updater

Publication title: Country Forecast. Venezuela; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Dec 2021

Publisher: The Economi st Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Political Science, Business And Economics

ISSN: 09669574

e-ISSN: 20489773

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611014147

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-december-2021-updater/docview/2611014147/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights r eserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Venezuela November 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-november-2021/docview/2663883258/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Venezuela+November+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-11-15&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=13507133&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Report Venezuela November 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Venezuela; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Nov 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507133

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2663883258

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-november-2021/docview/2663883258/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-05-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Venezuela November 2021 Updater

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-november-2021-updater/docview/2611016730/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 6.5 12.5 5.2 3.2 2.4 2.1 Consumer price inflation (av; %) 1,462 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8 Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.2 -6.6 -7.0 -7.2 -7.5 -7.5 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.5 2.5 2.0 1.6 1.5 1.2 Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 10.1 9.5 14.0 18.3 19.3 18.5 Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (av) 3.4 20.2 80 252 594 1,229 Exchange rate BsD:€1 (av) 4.0 23.5 92 296 722 1,524 Country forecast overview: Venezuela ranks 82nd of 82 countries in the global business environment rankings for 2022-26, retaining its bottom spot from the 2017-21 historical period, despite minor improvements in some areas. Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 29.7 Population growth -0.4 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 50.4 Real GDP growth -24.6 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 122.3 Real domestic demand growth -25.2 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,695 Inflation 7,490.5 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,113 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.3 Exchange rate (av) BsS:US$ 0.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.0 a EIU estimates. In January 2016 the politicised Supreme Court declared the legislature to be in contempt of court, blocking all subsequent legislation.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Venezuela+November+2021+Updater&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-11-15&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=09669574&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - Despite Venezuela's socioeconomic collapse and the ongoing covid-19 pandemic, EIU expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela, to retain power throughout the 2022-26 forecast period. Mr Maduro's position will be supported primarily by his grip over a complex security apparatus and the opposition's lack of de facto power. On this basis, we expect continued deterioration of the economy, sustained outward migration, and a poorer and more violent Venezuela. Despite US sanctions (and their impact on oil production), the Maduro regime has managed internal dissent through a patronage system that rewards loyalty and through its strict control over the security forces.
- The scale of the socioeconomic collapse and elevated political instability will ensure that the Maduro regime continues to be challenged both economically and politically. In particular, there is a non-negligible risk of regime change stemming from a possible breakdown in the patronage system that sustains the security forces' support of the regime. Under our baseline forecast, we assume that Mr Maduro will avoid this, as long as oil rents recover from 2021 onwards (the latest data suggest that this is indeed happening). However, there are risks to this assumption owing to the impact of US sanctions and weak incentives for investment in the domestic oil industry.
- De facto dollarisation of the economy is expanding. Concurrently, the government has taken measures that have allowed the official exchange rate to float. These measures have aided price stability and therefore increased the availability of some basic goods. However, the measures are not a product of economic orthodoxy, but rather of policy decisions to ensure the regime's survival. We do not expect to see the comprehensive economic and institutional reforms that would be required to resolve Venezuela's economic crisis within the forecast period.

Enlarge this image.
Enlarge this image.
Country forecast overview: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 6.5 12.5 5.2 3.2 2.4 2.1
Consumer price inflation (av; %) 1,462 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8
Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.2 -6.6 -7.0 -7.2 -7.5 -7.5
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.5 2.5 2.0 1.6 1.5 1.2
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 10.1 9.5 14.0 18.3 19.3 18.5
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (av) 3.4 20.2 80 252 594 1,229
Exchange rate BsD:€1 (av) 4.0 23.5 92 296 722 1,524
Country forecast overview: Business environment rankings                
Value of index a     Global rank b     Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26
2.95 3.19   82 82   12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

- Venezuela ranks 82nd of 82 countries in the global business environment rankings for 2022-26, retaining its bottom spot from the 2017-21 historical period, despite minor improvements in some areas. Comprehensive reforms to institutions, economic policy and the business environment are unlikely.

Country forecast overview: Venezuela's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: Enforcement of price controls remains lax, but risk of state intervention remains high. Corruption and selective application of regulations are common and continue to undermine free competition.
2024-26: Contract rights remain weak, and red tape and ad hoc interventionism continue.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Government efforts to revive foreign investment fail owing to US sanctions and political and economic instability.
2024-26: Investment flows remain low amid ongoing economic volatility. Intellectual property protection and private property rights deteriorate.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: Currency controls are weakened, but access to foreign currency remains limited. US sanctions hamper trade.
2024-26: Efforts to remove trade and capital controls are undertaken on a gradual basis, and de facto dollarisation advances. Domestic supply of foreign currency remains limited as oil prices decline.
Taxes 2022-23: Government explores options to broaden the tax base. However, its efforts are impeded by extremely high levels of informality.
2024-26: Tax system remains complex and unwieldy, but risk of discriminatory, ad hoc tax measures declines.
Financing 2022-23: Inflation remains high, and concerns surrounding economic instability restrict financing to only short term.
2024-26: Economic adjustments take time to feed through to solid, sustainable growth in credit to private sector and development of capital markets. Long-term finance remains in short supply.
Labour market 2022-23: Labour laws add substantially to non-wage costs. Firms prohibited from firing workers until end-2022. Ongoing emigration of skilled labour aggravates skills shortages.
2024-26: Labour market rigidities persist despite some increased flexibility in hiring and firing practices.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Underinvestment in water network and electricity grid leads to continued rationing and unpredictable blackouts.
2024-26: Investors remain highly cautious about committing to long-term capital projects. Infrastructure deteriorates even further.
Technological readiness 2022-23: E-government services remain almost non-existent. Telecommunications sector is opened to foreign investment, but with little interest. Local use of cryptocurrency expands among middle- and high-income households.
2024-26: Limited regulatory capacity and years of underinvestment continue to restrict internet and mobile coverage.
Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 29.7 Population growth -0.4
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 50.4 Real GDP growth -24.6
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 122.3 Real domestic demand growth -25.2
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,695 Inflation 7,490.5
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,113 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.3
Exchange rate (av) BsS:US$ 0.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.0
a EIU estimates.
Background: From 1958 until the mid-1990s, two parties-Acción Democrática and the Comité de Organización Política Electoral Independiente-alternated in power. Frequent economic crises and endemic corruption eventually led to a collapse in support for both parties and culminated in the 1998 election of Hugo Chávez, a former lieutenant-colonel and leader of a failed coup in 1992. Mr Chávez's policy programme exacerbated political polarisation, but several attempts to remove him from power before his death in March 2013 proved unsuccessful. His chosen successor, Nicolás Maduro, has seen his own popularity plummet, as his macroeconomic mismanagement-aggravated by wide-ranging US sanctions-has plunged the country into a state of economic collapse.
Political structure: Although Venezuela is nominally a federal republic with separation of powers, the ruling Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV) has systematically eroded institutions. In December 2015 the opposition coalition, Mesa de la Unidad Democrática, won control of the unicameral National Assembly. In January 2016 the politicised Supreme Court declared the legislature to be in contempt of court, blocking all subsequent legislation. In August 2017 a PSUV-only Constituent Assembly (ANC) granted itself control over all legislative matters, becoming the country's de facto legislature and sidelining the National Assembly. The ANC was dissolved at end-2020, after the PSUV and its allies regained control of the legislature in an election that was widely regarded as rigged.
Policy issues: The most pressing policy issue is the need to stabilise the crisis-ridden economy. The monetisation of vast public deficits has created an ever-increasing excess of domestic currency, triggering hyperinflation. Mismanagement of PDVSA (the state-owned oil company and originator of practically all foreign-currency inflows into the country) has resulted in a sharp contraction in oil production. Attempts to address these problems through distortionary price and currency controls proved actively counter-productive and led to major shortages of both foreign currency and basic goods. The scarcity of foreign exchange also led to arrears on most of the external debt issued by the sovereign and state-owned firms. The Maduro regime is now changing tack and pursuing incremental pro-market reforms, but its efforts are hindered by chronic economic instability, a lack of confidence in the legal framework and wide-ranging US sanctions.
Taxation: The top corporate tax rate is 34% for non-oil companies and 50% for oil firms. The value-added tax (VAT) rate stands at 12%.
Foreign trade: EIU estimates that the goods trade surplus fell to US$12.6bn in 2019, amid a long-term decline in oil exports. We estimate that the trade account deteriorated further in 2020, shifting to a US$1.7bn deficit.
Major exports 2018 % of total Major imports 2013 % of total
Petroleum 88.7 Intermediate goods 56.5
Other 11.3 Capital goods 24.2
    Consumer goods 19.3
       
Leading markets 2019 % of total Leading suppliers 2019 % of total
India 30.0 China 31.6
UAE 13.8 US 19.0
Malaysia 2.9 Brazil 7.9
Aruba 2.1 India 6.5
Outlook for 2022-26: Political stability EIU expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV, the Chavistas), to remain in power throughout the 2022-26 forecast period, despite having fomented the country's ongoing socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis. A number of factors underpin our forecast; particularly significant is the regime's strict control over the military, the police and paramilitary forces. This control, which depends on a patronage structure that rewards high-ranking officials and a disciplinary system that severely punishes insubordination, will allow the regime to manage internal dissent.
Having consolidated power over the years, the Chavistas have unchecked authority over all branches of government. Political control is nominally disputed by Juan Guaidó, the leader of the Plataforma Unitaria (PU) opposition alliance and self-declared interim president, but the opposition lacks de facto power. Mr Guaidó retains the backing of most Western powers, including the US, which he has used to co-ordinate a "maximum pressure" campaign (involving wide-ranging economic sanctions) against the Maduro regime. However, with these hardline tactics failing to deliver results-and in some cases proving counterproductive-domestic support for Mr Guaidó has waned.
Against this backdrop, in August the Maduro regime and the opposition began new talks aimed at overcoming the long-running political détente. However, the asymmetry in incentives and bargaining power between the sides-along with deep mutual distrust-are preventing a quick solution. In October the political dialogue entered a state of limbo, after the Chavistas stepped back from the negotiating table in protest at the US's detention of a Colombian businessman, Alex Saab, who is a close ally of Mr Maduro. Although talks could still resume, the balance of risks is tilted towards continued stalemate.
There are risks to our assumption that Mr Maduro will remain in power over the medium term. For instance, we do not discount the possibility of a negotiated transition if substantial progress is made in the political dialogue. An agreement on the reimposition of presidential term limits could potentially create a political opening in 2024, when Mr Maduro's term ends. Another possibility is that Mr Maduro is deposed through an internal coup, which could materialise in the event of an unexpected breakdown in the regime's patronage system (which is heavily reliant on revenue from PDVSA, the state-owned oil firm). At present, neither scenario is particularly likely.
In this context, the biggest political challenges facing the regime will be those of its own making, rather than those posed by the political opposition. As institutional corruption has risen, the Maduro regime has forged pacts with various armed groups, either out of political convenience or to tap new, illicit revenue streams. However, several of these agreements have now broken down, leading to violent turf wars across Venezuela. Although these criminal groups lack the resources to challenge the regime outright, they will undermine the enforcement of law and order in the country.
Outlook for 2022-26: Election watch On November 21st Venezuela will hold regional and local elections to choose governors, mayors and their legislative counterparts. The Maduro regime has taken several steps to give the upcoming polls more legitimacy. For instance, it has appointed two opposition representatives to the five-member board of the electoral council, renewed voter rolls and invited international observers-including the EU and the UN-to oversee the elections.
Although the playing field remains heavily tilted in the PSUV's favour, these electoral concessions have paved the way for increased opposition participation in the November polls. However, in our view, even with semi-competitive elections, the PU will struggle to make inroads into regional and local govern-ments. This is partly due to divisions within the diverse opposition coalition, but it also reflects a significant disconnect between the PU leadership and the public-a problem exacerbated by years of electoral boycotts by the opposition. Against this backdrop, we consider the PSUV's dominance at the sub-national level to be fairly safe.
Outlook for 2022-26: International relations The regime's main foreign policy challenge will be to facilitate a rapprochement with the US that is compatible with its own survival. Following a conflict-ridden relationship with the previous US government, Mr Maduro will try to reset bilateral ties under the current president, Joe Biden. We expect little progress to be made; US policy towards Venezuela has bipartisan support in the US, and Mr Biden is unlikely to provide significant sanctions relief unless the Maduro regime makes major political compromises and commits to democratic reform (both of which are highly improbable). Any changes to US sanctions policy will therefore be only on humanitarian grounds and aimed at improving the lives of the poorest Venezuelans, in the same vein as recent exemptions granted for pandemic-related transactions and imports of liquefied petroleum gas.
Venezuela's relations with its allies will be defined largely by ideological and geopolitical alignment, rather than mutual economic benefit. Russia and China have previously extended major financial support, but this has been scaled back in recent years, as Venezuela has been haphazard in making its repay-ments. Instead, Venezuela will increase its reliance on Iran, which has become a major backer of the regime. Iranian assistance has taken various forms in recent months, including intermittent fuel shipments (to alleviate Venezuela's petrol shortages), knowledge-sharing (to evade international sanctions) and technical assistance (to help PDVSA to repair its refinery complexes). However, faced with its own economic constraints, Iran will be unable to provide Venezuela with significant financing or investment.
Outlook for 2022-26: Policy trends The Maduro regime will find it difficult to put the economy back on a more sustainable footing, and it is currently veering from crisis to crisis. In the immediate term, the government's policy priorities will be to contain the public health calamity caused by covid-19 and to alleviate ongoing diesel shortages.
Despite the fact that Venezuela has not fully emerged from a second wave of covid-19 infections that took hold in the second quarter of 2021, the government has decided to move ahead with a relaxation of quarantine measures. We believe that this is largely politically motivated, aimed at creating a veneer of normality ahead of the November elections. However, with the vaccine rollout making little progress-as at November 5th only 32% of the population had been fully vaccinated-the government will probably be forced to tighten restrictions intermittently in order to reduce pressure on the country's decrepit medical infrastructure. We do not expect enough vaccine doses to be distributed to have a significant impact on local transmission until 2023.
The government will make greater progress on alleviating diesel shortages, largely owing to a newly signed oil swap agreement between PDVSA and its Iranian counterpart, the National Iranian Oil Company. The deal will provide Venezuela with light condensate, which is essential for producing diesel. However, the uptick in diesel production is likely to be constrained by severe operational difficulties at important refineries. As a result, a black market for diesel is likely to remain, as is the risk of domestic supply-chain disruptions. We believe that a longer-term remedy will hinge on the Biden administration reinstating exemptions on crude-for-diesel swaps. We expect that to happen by early 2022, but risks to this assumption are high.
Regarding the broader policy goal of promoting economic recovery, we expect GDP to finally stop falling in the forecast period (following seven years of contraction) as oil production stabilises and then ticks up slightly. However, we do not believe that the government will be willing or able to undertake the deep reforms needed to secure a stable and sustained recovery. The businesses that have survived years of capital destruction, brain drain, hyperinflation and suffocating government regulations have done so by adapting their models to the changing circumstances. More often than not, this has involved a down-sizing of personnel, increased informality and reduced profitability.
With the public sector completely overstretched, the government is betting on the private sector to drive the economic recovery. To that end, it has passed an anti-blockade law, which gives the executive branch the unchecked authority to sign new deals with private firms and countries confidentially (in order to skirt international sanctions), without going through public tender processes. Concurrently, the regime is working on a hydrocarbons reform that would incentivise increased private-sector participation in the oil industry. However, these efforts are unlikely to yield significant results; even assuming that the regime manages to sidestep financial sanctions, it will struggle to attract new investment, given the abysmal business environment and lack of confidence in the rule of law.
Outlook for 2022-26: Fiscal policy The authorities have not published complete data on the fiscal accounts since 2011. However, we expect that a high level of inefficient current expenditure, combined with an extremely weak revenue intake, will keep the budget deficit wide and the public debt/GDP ratio above 300% throughout the forecast period. The sovereign's ongoing default on most of its interest and principal repayments will continue to prevent access to external finance, leaving the regime reliant on monetisation to fund its deficits. Even if the government reaches an agreement with some of its creditors (including China) to restructure debt liabilities in 2022-26, we still expect the public debt burden to remain huge, particularly as considerable off-balance-sheet debt financing-mainly PDVSA-issued debt and development funds-understate the true size of total public liabilities.
Outlook for 2022-26: Monetary policy Monetary policy will remain subservient to fiscal policy as the Banco Central de Venezuela (BCV, the central bank) continues to print money to meet the public sector's financing needs. However, in recent years the BCV has taken steps to control growth of monetary aggregates. For instance, it lifted the cash reserve ratio (CRR) from 21.5% in late 2018 to 93% in early 2020, although it has relaxed the CRR slightly since then, to 85% currently. However, far from taming inflation, these measures have only led to the destruction of private-sector credit, which stands at less than 1% of levels recorded four years ago. These factors have accelerated the trend towards wider use of the US dollar in the economy; about two-thirds of financial transactions now take place in dollars.
Outlook for 2022-26: Economic growth Following a steep depression in 2014-20 (when real GDP contracted by a cumulative 77%), Venezuela is poised for a mild economic upswing in 2021-26. However, this upturn will still leave GDP well below its historical peaks.
Reflecting the decimation of the non-oil economy, Venezuela's economic growth is strongly correlated with oil production and exports, prospects for which have improved slightly. Having plummeted to 500,000 barrels/day in 2020-the lowest level in decades-we estimate that oil output increased modestly in 2021, to about 540,000 b/d. There are only 25 active oil rigs in the country-virtually unchanged from 2020 and substantially below a peak of 95 in early 2012. Moreover, there are few incentives to bring new rigs online in the near term. Venezuela's average (after tax) break-even price is currently about US$49/barrel. However, US sanctions on the regime raise the risks involved in dealing with Venezuela, forcing the country to offer a hefty discount on its crude. Therefore, at current market prices (Venezuela's oil basket was trading at US$62.7/b in October), there is only a modest profit to be made from new investment.
We expect real GDP growth to accelerate, from an estimated 6.5% in 2021 to 12.5% in 2022, assuming that oil prices remain supportive and that producers continue to adapt to post-sanctions export markets. Although this appears to be a sharp rebound, it largely reflects a low base of comparison and does not indicate a substantive recovery in the real economy. For instance, we forecast oil output at just 600,000 b/d in 2022, which is significantly below the pre-depression level of 2.5m b/d in 2012.
The recovery is likely to stagnate in the medium term. Serious operational problems, a limited pool of buyers of Venezuelan crude and the weak long-term fundamentals of the oil market will cause growth to taper off towards the end of our forecast period. The non-oil economy will make some modest gains, assuming that continued dollarisation engenders relative macroeconomic stability. However, weak fundamentals and a poor policy environment will keep market opportunities subdued. Consequently, we expect real GDP to remain below pre-pandemic levels even in 2026.
Outlook for 2022-26: Inflation A severely reduced domestic goods supply, constraints on import capacity and the monetisation of large public deficits will impede the disinflationary process throughout 2022-26. The regime has shown little inclination to take on the structural reforms that would address the root causes of inflation. Despite this, an ongoing process of informal dollarisation means that the bolívar will increasingly lose its relevance in price setting, which will help to ease inflationary pressures over time. In fact, we expect Venezuela to exit hyper-inflation in 2023, as monthly inflation will be below 50% for 12 consecutive months. Nevertheless, the extent of dollarisation in the economy will eventually level off, as we expect the public sector to continue using the bolívar, given the government's reliance on seigniorage revenue. Consequently, inflation will remain chronically high, even in the second half of our outlook period.
Outlook for 2022-26: Exchange rates On October 1st the BCV carried out its third currency redenomination in 13 years, with the new bolívar digital replacing the bolívar soberano at a rate of BsD1:BsS1m. Although the measure is ostensibly part of the BCV's pivot towards digitisation, the authorities have confirmed that they will continue to issue fiat money. In our view, the redenomination is largely cosmetic; although it will help to simplify book-keeping for a while, it will not fundamentally engender confidence in the currency, especially in the context of sustained debt monetisation. As a result, dollarisation will remain entrenched in the economy.
In real, trade-weighted terms, the bolívar is hugely overvalued relative to its historical average. This is a result of currency undershooting: during episodes of hyperinflation, prices tend to respond more rapidly than exchange rates to monetary expansion. The resulting real currency appreciation has wide-ranging implications for the economy. For consumers who are increasingly transacting in US dollars, it means that the cost of living is extremely high. Indeed, going by The Economist's Big Mac index (a currency comparison tool), Venezuela is one of the most expensive countries in the world in purchasing power parity terms. For businesses, meanwhile, currency overvaluation means that goods produced locally are simply not competitive by international standards. Assuming that inflation edges down over time, the weak fundamentals of the bolívar should produce renewed real depreciation in the medium term. Although there is considerable uncertainty around the future of the bolívar-bearing in mind the authorities' inability to tackle inflation or real currency appreciation for several years now-our basic assumption is that unwinding years of currency over-valuation will be a slow process.
Outlook for 2022-26: External sector Balance-of-payments pressures will remain severe in 2022-26, contributing to goods shortages and economic inequities. The BCV reported that reserves stood at US$11.1bn as at end-October, but this figure includes an expansion of IMF special drawing rights (SDRs), to which the authorities have no access. In reality, reserves are closer to US$6bn-their lowest level in three decades.
Under our baseline forecast, we expect reserves to rise modestly over the forecast period, averaging US$7.5bn in 2022-26. This increase will be driven largely by trends on the current account, as Venezuela's access to foreign capital will remain extremely limited. We expect the current-account surplus to widen from an estimated 0.5% of GDP in 2021 to an average of 1.8% of GDP in 2022-26. Crucially, our forecasts assume that export earnings will recover from a nadir in 2020. We also expect workers' remittances from abroad to play a significant role in propping up the current-account balance.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions
World GDP growth (%) 3.2 2.9 2.3 -3.7 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.6
US GDP growth (%) 2.3 2.9 2.3 -3.4 5.7 3.8 2.2 1.9 2.1 1.8
Latin America growth (%) 0.9 0.8 -0.5 -7.0 6.4 2.6 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.3
World trade growth (%) 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 9.0 5.8 4.8 4.1 4.0 4.0
US CPI (%) 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.4 3.2 2.2 1.9 2.0 2.3
EU27 CPI (%) 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.3 1.9 1.7 1.8 1.8 2.0
Industrial raw materials export price (%) 20.2 2.2 -8.6 -3.2 37.2 0.3 0.2 -12.2 0.8 1.1
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 71.7 78.5 66.0 61.0 55.5 53.5
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (%) 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.2 1.1 2.0 2.2 2.4
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.4 129.2 128.6 132.8 137.3 136.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Expenditure on GDP (BsD bn at current market prices)
GDP 0.00 0.01 0.81 16.18 250.0 1,846 7,395 22,593 52,095 105,340
Private consumption 0.00 0.01 0.37 10.49 172.6 1,305 5,239 16,551 38,860 81,859
Government consumption 0.00 0.00 0.21 6.22 99.7 747 2,951 9,010 20,564 41,929
Gross fixed investment 0.00 0.00 0.09 1.78 30.1 273 1,197 3,824 8,919 18,723
Exports of goods & services 0.00 0.00 0.44 5 92 664 2,394 7,273 16,439 33,987
Imports of goods & services 0.00 0.01 0.28 7 142 1,133 4,371 14,042 32,661 71,130
Stockbuilding 0.00 0.00 -0.02 0 -2 -8 -16 -24 -27 -28
Domestic demand 0.00 0.01 0.65 18 300 2,316 9,372 29,362 68,317 142,483
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 139.3 97.6 59.7 50.4 74.1 91.4 92.2 89.7 87.7 85.7
Private consumption 139.9 71.9 27.1 32.7 51.1 64.6 65.3 65.7 65.4 66.6
Government consumption 12.5 16.4 15.6 19.4 29.5 37.0 36.8 35.8 34.6 34.1
Gross fixed investment 22.9 15.8 6.5 5.5 8.9 13.5 14.9 15.2 15.0 15.2
Exports of goods & services 42.8 48.6 32.6 15.9 27.2 32.9 29.8 28.9 27.7 27.6
Imports of goods & services 50.7 53.2 20.8 22.2 42.0 56.1 54.5 55.7 55.0 57.9
Stockbuilding -28.1 -1.9 -1.2 -1.0 -0.7 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 147.2 102.2 48.0 56.7 88.9 114.7 116.8 116.5 115.0 115.9
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 100.5 73.7 45.3 64.9 69.1 70.7 70.9 73.3 74.6 77.7
Government consumption 9.0 16.8 26.1 38.4 39.9 40.4 39.9 39.9 39.5 39.8
Gross fixed investment 16.5 16.2 10.9 11.0 12.0 14.8 16.2 16.9 17.1 17.8
Stockbuilding -20.2 -1.9 -2.1 -1.9 -1.0 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1 -0.1 0.0
Exports of goods & services 30.7 49.8 54.5 31.6 36.7 36.0 32.4 32.2 31.6 32.3
Imports of goods & services 36.4 54.6 34.8 43.9 56.7 61.4 59.1 62.2 62.7 67.5
Memorandum items
Oil production ('000 b/d) 1,925 1,432 a 827 a 505 538 599 620 640 660 680
National savings ratio (%) -9.9 b 13.1 8.1 4.6 7.2 8.0 7.8 7.7 7.5 7.3
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Real expenditure on GDP (BsD m at constant 1997 market prices)
GDP 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Private consumption 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Government consumption 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Gross fixed investment 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Exports of goods & services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Imports of goods & services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Stockbuilding 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Domestic demand 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP -15.7 -19.6 -37.3 -31.0 6.5 12.5 5.2 3.2 2.4 2.1
Private consumption -16.2 -20.1 -38.0 -24.4 5.3 12.5 5.3 3.8 2.7 2.4
Government consumption -7.2 -9.1 -26.8 -21.0 3.0 12.2 5.0 2.0 2.0 1.5
Fixed investment -45.3 -37.5 -50.0 -30.0 8.5 35.0 15.0 5.0 2.0 2.0
Exports of goods & services 0.0 -10.8 -27.7 -27.4 5.8 11.7 4.8 3.4 3.2 2.6
Imports of goods & services -34.7 0.3 -19.0 6.5 3.0 17.0 7.7 4.0 3.0 2.5
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -2.4 1.9 1.3 1.0 0.8 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand -21.1 -18.2 -35.7 -23.2 5.5 14.1 6.0 3.5 2.5 2.1
Real contribution to growth (%)
Private consumption -11.2 -13.8 -26.1 -16.5 3.9 9.2 3.9 2.8 2.0 1.7
Government consumption -1.5 -2.1 -6.9 -6.3 1.0 4.1 1.7 0.7 0.7 0.5
Gross fixed investment -7.0 -3.8 -3.9 -1.9 0.5 2.2 1.2 0.4 0.2 0.2
External balance 6.4 -1.8 -1.7 -7.3 0.2 -3.3 -1.7 -0.7 -0.4 -0.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Origin of GDP (BsD m at constant 1997 prices)
GDP at factor cost 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Industry 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture -16.5 -16.3 -35.0 -30.0 5.0 8.0 3.0 2.5 2.5 2.5
Industry -23.2 -30.7 -28.0 -20.0 -4.0 12.0 5.0 2.0 1.0 1.0
Services -12.1 -15.2 -40.5 -35.5 11.9 13.0 5.3 3.8 3.0 2.5
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 2.9 3.1 b 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0
Industry 28.4 24.5 b 28.1 32.6 29.4 29.2 29.2 28.8 28.4 28.1
Services 68.7 72.4 b 68.7 64.2 67.5 67.7 67.8 68.2 68.6 68.9
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity
Labour productivity growth (% -20.2 -22.9 4.6 6.2 1.4 2.3 -1.7 -1.7 0.4 0.1
Total factor productivity growth (%) -16.1 -19.1 -8.0 -5.0 6.5 9.3 3.9 3.2 4.4 4.0
Growth of capital stock (%) -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0
Growth of potential GDP (%) -15.0 -19.0 -27.7 -8.4 1.3 7.6 1.6 1.0 2.1 1.7
Growth of GDP (%) -15.7 c -19.6 c -37.3 -31.0 6.5 12.5 5.2 3.2 2.4 2.1
Growth of GDP per head (%) -16.8 -20.6 -33.3 -31.0 9.3 13.4 6.0 4.0 3.2 2.8
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 31.2 b 31.6 29.7 29.7 29.0 28.8 28.5 28.3 28.1 27.9
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 139.3 97.6 59.7 50.4 74.1 91.4 92.2 89.7 87.7 85.7
GDP (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 9 92 56.3 48.1 72.6 89.6 90.4 87.9 86.8 84.8
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 4,461 b 3,086 2,008 1,695 2,556 3,179 3,229 3,166 3,119 3,071
GDP per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 275 2,918 1,894 1,616 2,506 3,117 3,166 3,103 3,088 3,040
Private consumption (US$ bn) 139.9 71.9 27.1 32.7 51.1 64.6 65.3 65.7 65.4 66.6
Private consumption (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 9 68 25.5 31.2 50.1 63.3 64.0 64.4 64.8 65.9
Private consumption per head (US$) 4,480 b 2,270 910 1,100 1,770 2,250 2,290 2,320 2,330 2,390
Private consumption per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 276 2,151 858 1,048 1,730 2,202 2,243 2,274 2,303 2,362
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 333.2 274.3 175.1 122.3 134.8 156.3 169.0 178.3 186.1 194.3
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 10,670 b 8,670 5,890 4,110 4,650 5,440 5,920 6,290 6,620 6,960
Personal disposable income (BsD bn) 0.00 b 0.01 0.41 11.33 186 1,421 5,732 18,061 42,249 88,935
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 155.4 b 81.4 30.6 35.3 55.2 70.4 71.4 71.7 71.1 72.3
Growth of real disposable income (%) -16.2 b -18.6 -38.1 -27.7 5.3 13.5 5.8 3.6 2.3 2.3
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.42 b 0.42 0.39 0.39 0.37 0.37 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.35
Share of world GDP (%; market exchange rates) 0.17 0.11 0.07 0.06 0.08 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.08 0.07
Share of world GDP (%; PPP) 0.28 0.22 0.13 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.11
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.20 0.18 a 0.09 0.03 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.04
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
NFPS expenditure 40.3 47.4 24.6 19.8 23.8 26.5 26.8 26.5 26.4 26.4
Interest 0.9 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.8 0.5 0.4 0.4
Non-interest expenditure 39.4 46.4 24.4 19.7 23.5 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0
NFPS revenue 17.5 16.9 16.7 14.8 16.6 19.9 19.8 19.3 18.9 18.9
NFPS balance -22.8 -30.5 -7.9 -5.0 -7.2 -6.6 -7.0 -7.2 -7.5 -7.5
Primary balance -21.9 -29.5 -7.7 -4.9 -6.9 -6.1 -6.2 -6.7 -7.1 -7.1
Government debt 35.9 180.8 232.8 304.1 317.0 329.0 336.0 348.0 360.0 372.0
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (av) 0.0000 0.0001 0.0135 0.3207 3.37 20 80 252 594 1,229
Exchange rate BsD:US$1 (end‑period) 0.0000 0.0006 0.0445 1.0673 6.18 35 141 382 804 1,689
Parallel exchange rate BsD:US$ (av) 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0003 0.003 0.02 0.08 0.26 0.60 1.24
Exchange rate BsD:€1 (av) 0.0000 0.0001 0.0152 0.3660 4.01 24 92 296 722 1,524
Exchange rate BsD:€1 (end-period) 0.0000 0.0007 0.0500 1.3097 7.16 40 162 457 989 2,111
Real effective exchange rate (av) CPI-based 2,321.8 3,288.5 4,291 6,788 9,857 10,857 10,168 9,579 9,057 8,732
Real effective exchange rate (av) PPI-based 36.7 51.3 66.7 102.9 151.9 167.5 156.4 146.3 137.4 131.6
Real effective exchange rate (av) ULC-based 58.8 6.3 2.3 2.6 4.1 4.8 4.7 4.6 4.3 4.1
Purchasing power parity BsD:US$1 (av) 0.00 c 0.00 0.00 0.13 1.85 11.81 44 127 280 542
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 1,170.0 c 63,281.9 c 4,945.6 c 1,286.8 c 1,102.6 638.7 299.0 204.4 130.6 102.2
Domestic credit growth (%) 593.0 110,873.9 2,155.5 1,550.8 1,534.2 859.6 313.2 208.4 133.8 103.5
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 21.1 c 22.3 c 28.7 c 13.5 c 10.1 9.5 14.0 18.3 19.3 18.5
Deposit interest rate (%; av) 14.7 c 14.6 c 30.6 c 52.9 c 43.9 27.0 19.0 15.3 14.3 13.5
Money market interest rate (%; av) 0.5 c 5.0 c 110.0 c 182.2 c 240.1 72.5 40.0 31.3 27.5 25.0
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 15.1 15.7 11.5 11.4 10.9 11.0 11.0 11.1 11.1 11.1
Labour force (% change) 5.5 3.9 -26.5 -1.5 -4.2 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2
Employment (m) 14.0 14.6 8.8 5.7 6.0 6.6 7.0 7.4 7.5 7.7
Employment (% change) -10.0 -20.0 -40.0 -35.0 5.0 10.0 7.0 5.0 2.0 2.0
Unemployment (m) 1.1 1.1 2.8 5.7 4.9 4.4 4.0 3.7 3.6 3.4
Unemployment rate (%) 7.2 6.9 24.0 49.8 45.0 40.3 36.3 33.3 32.1 30.9
Wage and price inflation (%)
Consumer prices (av) 982.8 1,005,130.7 17,365.2 3,634.1 1,461.5 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8
Consumer prices (end-period) 2,581.8 1,699,183.5 7,374.4 3,713.3 898.5 512.1 249.8 171.0 112.9 101.2
Producer prices (av) 1,026.0 1,005,130.7 17,365.2 3,634.1 1,461.5 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8
GDP deflator (av) 748.1 c 608,217.8 13,026.3 2,797.4 1,351.0 556.3 280.8 195.9 125.1 98.1
Private consumption deflator (av) 899.2 c 448,578.1 8,065.0 3,688.4 1,461.5 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8
Government consumption deflator (av) 646.3 c 1,005,125.2 17,358.4 3,627.8 1,456.7 567.5 276.5 199.3 123.8 100.9
Fixed investment deflator (av) 1,495.4 c 768,135.6 11,044.3 2,770.2 1,461.5 571.9 281.3 204.2 128.7 105.8
Average nominal wages 816.7 58,631.0 5,000.0 2,800.0 1,539.6 645.8 294.6 210.9 132.8 108.7
Average real wages -15.3 -94.2 -70.8 -22.3 5.0 11.0 3.5 2.2 1.8 1.4
Unit labour costs (BsD-based) 1,048.7 76,072.1 4,777.9 2,630.7 1,516.7 629.0 301.4 216.2 131.8 108.5
Unit labour costs (US$-based) -14.6 -89.1 -63.7 15.3 53.6 21.8 1.1 0.7 -1.7 0.8
Labour costs per hour (US$) 1.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 6.8 c 8.1 c 6.0 -2.7 0.4 2.3 1.9 1.5 1.3 1.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.9 c 8.3 10.1 -5.4 0.5 2.5 2.0 1.6 1.5 1.2
Goods: exports fob 34.0 c 33.7 c 17.4 5.5 10.2 13.6 12.6 11.9 11.6 11.4
Goods: imports fob -12.0 c -12.8 c -6.5 -7.2 -9.6 -11.4 -10.9 -10.3 -10.3 -10.4
Trade balance 22.0 c 20.9 c 10.8 -1.8 0.5 2.2 1.7 1.6 1.3 1.0
Services: credit 1.1 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Services: debit -6.7 -6.4 -5.4 -3.5 -3.8 -4.3 -4.6 -4.8 -5.1 -5.2
Services balance -5.6 c -5.7 c -5.0 -3.2 -3.4 -3.9 -4.1 -4.2 -4.4 -4.5
Primary income: credit 0.6 0.0 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6
Primary income: debit -10.9 -9.1 -4.0 -2.4 -2.4 -2.7 -3.1 -3.6 -3.5 -3.8
Primary income balance -10.3 c -9.1 c -3.6 -2.2 -2.2 -2.2 -2.5 -3.1 -2.9 -3.2
Secondary income: credit 0.8 2.3 3.8 4.5 5.5 6.3 6.8 7.1 7.5 7.8
Secondary income: debit -0.2 -0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1
Secondary income balance 0.6 c 2.0 c 3.8 4.5 5.4 6.2 6.7 7.1 7.4 7.7
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 45.8 58.3 54.1 36.4 58.7 63.5 55.0 51.5 47.9 46.6
Export prices (% change) -49.1 27.4 -7.3 -32.8 61.4 8.3 -13.4 -6.4 -7.1 -2.6
Import price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 276.1 288.8 139.1 139.2 256.1 292.6 263.8 259.4 248.5 255.1
Import prices (% change) 8.6 4.6 -51.8 0.1 84.0 14.2 -9.9 -1.6 -4.2 2.7
Terms of trade (2005=100) 16.6 20.2 38.9 26.1 22.9 21.7 20.9 19.9 19.3 18.3
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 7.5 6.1 -1.6 -7.2 11.2 5.6 5.9 4.6 4.4 4.5
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment -0.1 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 1.1 1.0 1.0
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 0.0 0.9 1.6 1.9 1.3 1.1 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.1
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) -0.3 5.6 14.3 17.3 11.0 7.5 8.0 7.1 6.6 6.2
Outward direct investment -2.2 -0.7 -0.7 -0.5 -0.6 -0.6 -0.6 -0.7 -0.7 -0.7
Net foreign direct investment -2.3 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3
Stock of inward direct investment 30.1 31.0 31.9 32.9 33.9 34.9 36.1 37.2 38.2 39.1
Stock of inward direct investment per head (US$) 964.4 980.4 1,073.3 1,105.5 1,168.8 1,212.9 1,264.2 1,311.7 1,357.0 1,401.3
Stock of inward direct investment (% of GDP) 21.6 31.8 53.4 65.2 45.7 38.2 39.1 41.4 43.5 45.6
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.00 0.19 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.10 0.08 0.07 0.07
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.10 0.10 0.09 0.10 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 176.1 c 182.9 c 185.6 c 189.3 c 191.0 193.3 193.1 192.8 191.5 190.7
Total external debt (% of GDP) 126.5 187.5 310.6 375.3 257.9 211.4 209.5 215.1 218.4 222.5
Total external debt (% of GDP, at parallel exchange rate) 2,050.0 c 198.3 c 329.5 c 393.8 c 263.1 215.7 213.7 219.4 220.6 224.7
Debt/exports ratio (%) 490.7 524.4 976.4 2,750.2 1,612.8 1,227.6 1,282.7 1,329.5 1,332.7 1,328.7
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 12.5 13.8 0.2 13.5 0.1 0.5 5.5 8.8 7.9 9.5
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data; EIU is the source for all forecast data unless otherwise stated
Global data Oil prices: dated Brent
US and OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
US and OECD growth: OECD
US 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
US$ effective exchange rate: IMF, IFS; nominal weighted index
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
Domestic data Balance of payments, exchange and interest rates: IMF, IFS
Budget balance: non-financial public sector
Commercial banks' prime lending rate: average nominal interest rate charged on loans to agriculture
Deposit interest rate: average nominal interest rate on 90-day term deposits
Exchange rate: IMF, IFS; market rates expressed as BsS:US$
External debt; World Bank, International Debt Statistics
GDP: at constant 1997 prices, BCV
Inflation: BCV, consumer price index (1997=100) for the Caracas metropolitan area
Labour market statistics: derived from a series given in ILO, Yearbook of Labour Statistics
Oil production and export volumes: Bloomberg
Population: Centro Latinoamericano y Caribeño de Demografía (Celade, Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre)
Social indicators: World Bank, World Development Indicators
Stock of foreign investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report
Abbreviations BCV: Banco Central de Venezuela (the central bank)
IFS: International Financial Statistics
ILO: International Labour Organisation
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development

Subject: Tax rates; Contempt of court; Legislatures; Foreign exchange rates; Electricity distribution; Politics; Sanctions; Foreign investment; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Patronage; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Petroleum production; Tax reform; Wage & price controls; Labor market; COVID-19; Economic forecasts; Economic crisis

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Foreign exchange rates Sanctions Foreign investment International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Petroleum production Tax reform Wage & price controls Labor market Economic forecasts Economic crisis; Industry: 92112 :‎ Legislative Bodies

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Classification: 92112: Legislative Bodies

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Forecast Venezuela November 2021 Updater

Publication title: Country Forecast. Venezuela; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Nov 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Political Science, Business And Economics

ISSN: 09669574

e-ISSN: 20489773

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611016730

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-november-2021-updater/docview/2611016730/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Argentina November 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-argentina-november-2021/docview/2660529978/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Argentina&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Argentina+November+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-11-09&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Argentina&amp;rft.issn=02694212&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Argentina; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Argentina; Latin America

Title: Country Report Argentina November 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Argentina; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Nov 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 02694212

e-ISSN: 20474237

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2660529978

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-argentina-november-2021/docview/2660529978/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-05-08

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Turkey November 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-turkey-november-2021/docview/2660529760/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Turkey&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Turkey+November+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-11-09&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Turkey&amp;rft.issn=02695464&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Turkey; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Turkey; Middle East

Title: Country Report Turkey November 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Turkey; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Nov 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695464

e-ISSN: 20475977

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2660529760

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-turkey-november-2021/docview/2660529760/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-05-08

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Turkey November 2021 Updater

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-turkey-november-2021-updater/docview/2611014273/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 8.0 3.3 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.5 Consumer price inflation (%) 18.1 15.8 12.7 9.7 8.2 7.4 Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.1 -3.3 -3.1 -3.0 -2.9 -2.7 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -2.8 -2.7 -1.9 -1.5 -1.4 -1.2 3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 19.4 17.5 14.0 11.2 9.4 8.5 Exchange rate TL: Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 84.3 Population growth 1.4 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 716 Real GDP growth 3.2 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,575b Real domestic demand growth 3.3 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 8,490 Inflation 12.5 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 30,531b Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.0 Exchange rate (av) TL: To win seats, parties need at least 10% of the national vote. Since the failed coup, power has been increasingly concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan, the AKP leader, who was re-elected for a second presidential term in June 2018. Negative real interest rates and high political risks have led to inadequate capital inflows into Turkey and raise the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Turkey&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Turkey+November+2021+Updater&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-11-09&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Turkey&amp;rft.issn=09668632&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - The re-election of Recep Tayyip Erdogan as president in June 2018 concluded Turkey's shift from a parliamentary to a presidential republic. EIU expects Mr Erdogan and his conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) to stay in power until at least 2023 (when the next presidential and parliamentary elections are due), maintaining a tight grip on national institutions and the media in order to continue to dominate Turkish politics.
- The economy has become less stable as a result of domestic political tensions, fraught international relations and unorthodox economic policies. This has jeopardised the hard-won improvements in macroeconomic stability on which the AKP built much of its previous electoral success. The government's unorthodox and unpredictable policies in response to the coronavirus outbreak have created further sources of economic instability.
- Turkey's foreign policy priorities have shifted under the AKP since the early 2000s. Declining trust in the US and the EU, a gradual shift to a multipolar world and an ambition to make Turkey a regional power have all incentivised the AKP to pursue a "Turkey first" approach to foreign policy. Turkey is at odds with its peers in the eastern Mediterranean over maritime borders and vast offshore gas reserves. Turkey has openly backed Azerbaijan in its military conflict with Armenia over Nagorny Karabakh, and has deployed peacekeeping troops to the region, alongside Russian troops.
- A more favourable external environment, together with the strength of Turkey's industrial sector, continues to underpin our view that real GDP growth will have accelerated to an estimated 8% in 2021. We expect average growth of 3.4% per year in 2022-26-short of the government's annual 5% target, but close to Turkey's medium-term potential.
- Turkey's heavy reliance on often volatile, short-term capital inflows to fund lending and drive economic growth leaves the economy vulnerable to sudden shifts in investor sentiment. However, the country's location and its large consumer market make it an attractive place to do business.

Enlarge this image.
Enlarge this image.
Country forecast overview: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 8.0 3.3 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.5
Consumer price inflation (%) 18.1 15.8 12.7 9.7 8.2 7.4
Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.1 -3.3 -3.1 -3.0 -2.9 -2.7
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -2.8 -2.7 -1.9 -1.5 -1.4 -1.2
3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 19.4 17.5 14.0 11.2 9.4 8.5
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 8.47 9.96 10.70 11.55 12.30 13.10
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
Country forecast overview: Business environment rankings                
Value of index a     Global rank b     Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26
6.16 6.24   45 54   17 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

- Turkey's business environment score increases slightly in the forecast period (2022-26). However, the country's global ranking drops by nine places, to 54th, and it falls to last place in the regional ranking. Political tensions, increased powers concentrated under the president, a politicised central bank and high domestic inflation have raised uncertainty about the direction of economic policy.

Country forecast overview: Turkey's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: Adverse market conditions delay any reform momentum and privatisation deals.
2024-26: Networks of patronage remain a constraint on the free market. Competition is still limited in several sectors.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) has been a government priority, but macroeconomic instability, increased nationalism, and concerns about security, corruption and politicisation of the judicial system will curb inflows.
2024-26: Further privatisation and government incentives to attract investment in major sectors could boost FDI inflows.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: The threat of sanctions from the US and the EU continues to hurt Turkey's trade and investment environment.
2024-26: Negotiations with the EU to update the customs union are likely to be protracted, given poor Turkish-EU relations.
Taxes 2022-23: Finance minister will reintroduce a more prudent approach to public finances. No tax rises in 2023 election year.
2024-26: Tax collection capacity will improve, but tax evasion remains an issue.
Financing 2022-23: The Central Bank of Turkey continues its monetary easing cycle. Government lending policy leads to a sharp increase in contingent liabilities.
2024-26: The government reverts to relying on state banks to extend credit and support economic growth. Continued reliance on capital inflows amid tighter global liquidity continues. Contingent liabilities remain problematic.
The labour market 2022-23: Government measures to support employment and ban lay-offs end. The inactivity rate continues to rise and the size of the shadow economy increases.
2024-26: Some improvements for employers, with legislation on severance pay and more flexible employment regulation.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Next stage of Istanbul airport is operational. Slower progress made on other projects, including Istanbul Canal.
2024-26: Landmark road and bridge projects near completion. New industrial zones become operational. Other major urban infrastructure projects around Istanbul could progress. Nevertheless, gaps and bottlenecks may persist.
Technological readiness 2022-23: Spending on research and development remains moderate, at about 1% of GDP, holding back efforts to move the economy up the value-added ladder.
2024-26: Turkey's young population spurs further rapid digital transformation of the banking sector.
Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 84.3 Population growth 1.4
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 716 Real GDP growth 3.2
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,575 b Real domestic demand growth 3.3
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 8,490 Inflation 12.5
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 30,531 b Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.0
Exchange rate (av) TL:US$ 7.01 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.5
a Actual. b EIU estimates.
Background: The Turkish Republic was formed in 1923. Nationalist resistance forces led by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk defeated the occupying allies after the first world war, establishing the country's current borders. Since then, Turkey's political and economic structure has been oriented towards the West. The country became a member of the Council of Europe in 1949 and NATO in 1952, and signed an association agreement with the then European Community in 1963. A customs union with the EU took effect in 1996. EU accession negotiations were opened in 2005, but progress has been slow, as Turkey's Western-EU anchor has weakened over the past decade. Under current political circumstances accession will not be possible in 2022-26.
Political structure: Turkey is a centralised secular democratic state, but checks and balances are limited and its secular character has been weakened by the religious conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP), which came to power in 2002. Turkey has a history of military coups-in 1960, 1971 and 1980-leading to periods of military rule. There was a failed coup in July 2016. Turkey has had a presidential system of government, in place since the president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, changed the parliamentary system in 2018, with parliament elected for a five-year term. To win seats, parties need at least 10% of the national vote. Since the failed coup, power has been increasingly concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan, the AKP leader, who was re-elected for a second presidential term in June 2018.
Policy issues: Maintaining macroeconomic stability and stabilising the lira since the pandemic began in 2020 are the major policy challenges. The government rolled out a large fiscal stimulus to support the economy in 2020 and is using its state banks to expand credit growth. This has led to major external imbalances and a sharp lira sell-off. Negative real interest rates and high political risks have led to inadequate capital inflows into Turkey and raise the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis. The Kurdish issue, which has blocked economic development in the south-east, is an important challenge, but peace talks with the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) collapsed in July 2015, and there has been a resurgence in violence. Politicisation of the judiciary since the coup attempt has undermined its independence. Corruption and patronage are widespread.
Taxation: The corporation tax rate was raised from 20% to 22% in 2018. Personal income tax rates range between 15% and 35%. In January 2020 the highest marginal tax rate was raised from 35% to 40% for incomes of more than TL500,000 (US$60,000). Reducing tax evasion was one of the elements of previous IMF programmes, but compliance remains weak.
Foreign trade: In 2020 goods exports totalled US$168.4bn and imports about US$206.3bn, creating a trade deficit of about US$37.9bn. This drove a current-account deficit of US$35bn (4.9% of GDP).
Major exports 2020 % of total Major imports 2020 % of total
Transport equipment 31.0 Fuels 5.2
Textiles & clothing 17.5 Chemicals 14.7
Agro-industry 10.9 Machinery 11.5
Iron & steel 6.3 Transport equipment 9.5
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
Germany 9.9 China 11.0
UK 7.0 Germany 10.4
US 6.3 Russia 8.5
Iraq 5.7 US 5.5
Outlook for 2022-26: Political stability Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president, and his conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) have dominated Turkey's political scene since 2002. During this period they have tightened their grip on authority, replacing Turkey's parliamentary system with an executive presidential system in 2018. The economy has become less stable as a result of political tensions, fraught international relations and unorthodox economic policies. This has jeopardised the hard-won improvements in macroeconomic stability on which the AKP built much of its previous electoral success.
Despite declining popularity levels, we expect Mr Erdogan to be re-elected in 2023 and to continue to dominating Turkish politics over the forecast period (2022-26) through a mixture of authoritarianism, control of state resources and the bureaucracy, and his still-strong personal popularity-all aided by a largely supportive domestic media. The government will continue to clamp down on domestic political opposition. However, downside risks to our forecast exist. Rising prices and a weak Turkish lira, alongside public dissatisfaction with widespread corruption, are damaging the government. In a sign of rising factionalism within the AKP, Sedat Peker, a former government protégé and supporter, has targeted the interior minister, Suleyman Soylu, with allegations of corruption (which Mr Soylu has denied) and continues to draw attention to other allegations against current and former politicians.
Anti-refugee sentiment is high in Turkey, and the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan will only make this more central to the politics of Mr Erdogan and the AKP. Discussions have also begun on a new constitution, with the AKP planning to make its draft public in early 2022. This could include processes to ensure that Mr Erdogan stays in power beyond 2028, when his second term as president would end (assuming, as seems likely, that he is re-elected in 2023), as well as a strengthening of parliamentary powers. Mr Erdogan also has plans to introduce economic and judicial reforms, improve human rights and strengthen property rights, which should appease Western governments and foreign investors. However, we expect only limited progress to be made, especially on the human rights front, in 2022-26.
Outlook for 2022-26: Election watch The next presidential and parliamentary elections will be held in 2023. The president has repeatedly stated that these elections will not be brought forward. Mr Erdogan was re-elected president in June 2018, with 52.6% of the vote. At the parliamentary election, held at the same time, the Islamist-rooted AKP lost its absolute majority, although it secured a coalition majority with the small, right-wing Nationalist Action Party (MHP). The election process appeared to be mostly free but largely unfair; opposition candidates received little or no domestic media coverage.
Critically, several parties are now competing against Mr Erdogan for conservative and right-of-centre votes. Polls from end-October gave the Good Party (IP) about 14% of the vote. The IP has allied itself with the perennial main opposition party, the Republican People's Party (CHP; which got about 26% of the vote). Together they pose a substantial threat to the AKP (which garnered about 31%) and its right-wing ally, the MHP (which received about 8%). In the presidential election Mr Erdogan is currently leading.
EIU expects Mr Erdogan and the AKP to win the next presidential and parliamentary elections. This is in part because of their popularity among Turkey's conservative voter base, but also because of the president's control of the media, the government's aim at dividing the opposition, its use of the police to quell public protests from all kinds of opposition groups, and a likely manipulation of the electoral law (including increasing the threshold to enter parliament ahead of the vote to bolster the AKP's prospects).
Outlook for 2022-26: International relations The AKP and Mr Erdogan are seeking to bolster Turkey's standing as a regional power in the Middle East. This increasingly assertive foreign policy-including regarding Azerbaijan, Syria and the eastern Mediterranean-remains popular with many Turkish voters and has also helped the AKP to distract Turkish citizens from other domestic economic and political concerns. However, this approach is isolating Turkey in the region and internationally.
Human rights are already a leading issue in Turkish-EU relations, alongside Cyprus and territorial rights in the eastern Mediterranean. In May 2021 the European Parliament demanded that the European Commission formally suspend EU accession talks with Turkey over human rights issues. Turkey is on a collision course with a fellow NATO member, Greece, which it has antagonised by its continuous deployment of an energy exploration research vessel in disputed waters in the gas-rich eastern Mediterranean. In December 2020 these prospecting activities led the EU to impose sanctions on Turkish energy officials and threaten wider action, but tensions have eased of late with Turkey pausing its naval activities in the disputed waters.
Turkish-US relations have been strained by Turkey's purchase of the Russian-made S-400 defence system in 2019, despite the country's membership of NATO. In response the US introduced sanctions in December 2020, but these are mild and target Turkey's defence procurement agency-cutting Turkey off from US military hardware and technology. There is a risk that the US will impose stronger sanctions (for instance, if Turkey activates the S-400 defence system). In the worst-case scenario, Turkey could be denied access to international financial institutions, but we expect US policy to continue emphasising the need to keep Turkey in the Western camp.
Given the fragility of the economy and the vulnerability of the lira, Turkey can ill afford deeper rows with the US and the EU-especially as Turkey's economy is closely entwined with Europe's. Nevertheless, we do not expect any improvement in Turkey's relations with the EU or the US in 2022-26. Mr Erdogan's tough rhetoric resonates well domestically, and opinion polls show that Turkey's conflicts in its near abroad, including Azerbaijan, Syria and the eastern Mediterranean, are popular among Turkish voters. As Turkey's economic outlook deteriorates, there is a risk that Mr Erdogan's foreign policy will harden.
Outlook for 2022-26: Policy trends The economic downturn in 2020 led to the biggest credit growth boom in a decade, facilitated by Turkey's state-owned banks and a politicised central bank. This has kept inflation high, owing to lira depreciation against all other major currencies. In November 2020 Mr Erdogan made a step towards policy normality by appointing a former finance minister, Naci Agbal (known for championing orthodox monetary policies), as central bank governor. However, Mr Erdogan replaced Mr Agbal in March 2021, following a rise in the policy rate from 17% to 19%, damaging financial market sentiment again and adding to the unpredictability of Turkey's policies. The new governor, Sahap Kavcioglu, a former member of parliament and official at Halkbank, a Turkish state bank, shares the president's unorthodox view that high interest rates cause inflation. Since September the main policy rate has been cut twice despite rising inflation. The move is the result of political pressure from Mr Erdogan.
A fresh lockdown came into force in April, but almost all obligatory restrictions were lifted on July 1st. Despite rising coronavirus cases-Turkey is reporting 28,384 new infections on average each day, which corresponds to 47% of the peak (reported on April 20th 2021)-we do not expect stringent restrictions to be reimposed. About 58% of the population had been fully vaccinated by early November.
Turkey's economy has displayed resilience during previous bouts of political instability and market volatility, owing to a prudent approach to the public finances, effective capitalisation of the banking sector, and a dynamic and diversified private sector. However, other shortcomings, such as cronyism and corruption, skills mismatches and tax evasion, are unlikely to be effectively addressed in the forecast period. Reforms to address the structural imbalances that underlie Turkey's recurring boom-and-bust economic cycle are needed. There is a high risk that the government will revert to its preferred policy of unsustainable rapid credit growth, which could cause a sudden credit stop and a potential balance-of-payments crisis. There is also a risk of US financial sanctions, which would further impede Turkey's ability to attract foreign-currency inflows and restrict its access to global debt markets.
Outlook for 2022-26: Fiscal policy The budget deficit reached 3.4% of GDP in 2020, as coronavirus-related restrictions hit revenue growth and the government deferred collection of some tax and social security premium payments. In 2021 we estimate the deficit at 3.1% of GDP, down from 3.4% of GDP in 2020. The finance minister reintroduced a more prudent approach to the public finances in an effort to recover policy credibility and reassure investors. Further rises in indirect taxes, a restructuring scheme for tax payments and a rise in corporate income tax to 25% should also benefit the budget this year.
Ahead of the election in 2023, we expect the deficit to stay elevated by historical standards, averaging 3.2% of GDP per year in 2022-23. It will then narrow to an average of 2.9% of GDP in 2024-26 as the government reins in spending to reassure investors. Government debt reached 39.9% of GDP at end-2020, and will gradually fall to 34.2% at end-2025.
Outlook for 2022-26: Monetary policy The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) adopted an ultra-loose policy in the early stages of the coronavirus crisis, pushing real rates firmly into negative territory. This helped economic activity to recover via a credit boom, but also contributed to a lira sell-off, a rapid loss of foreign-exchange reserves and high inflation. The CBT then began to raise its main policy rate again-the one-week repurchase (repo) rate-by a total of 1,075 basis points to 19% between September 2020 and March 2021.
After Mr Kavcioglu was appointed in March 2021, the CBT maintained the repo rate unchanged until September. However, the CBT is widely believed to have its hands tied by Mr Erdogan, and the MPC cut rate again in September and October, despite rising inflation, by a total of 300 basis points to 16%-meaning the policy rate is now lower than annual inflation.
We do not expect the CBT to cut the policy rate again this year, or only by 100 basis points in December, as the deceleration in inflation now looks set to be limited. We expect political pressure and slowing inflation to lead to further cuts in 2022-26. However, weak capital flows, and the high risk premium and level of dollarisation will limit rate cuts. Real rates will return to positive territory in 2023, which should help to keep investors on board. Foreign-exchange reserves are rising owing to swap agreements, reserve requirement arrangements, IMF funding and gold from ore. We expect efforts by the bank to limit depreciation of the local currency and a renewed increase in the dollarisation rate of lira deposits to limit growth of foreign-exchange reserves.
Outlook for 2022-26: Economic growth Turkey's economy grew by 1.7% in 2020, making the country one of only two of the G20 group of major economies that recorded growth amid the coronavirus pandemic (the other being China). In 2021 we estimate economic growth of 8%, driven by domestic and foreign demand. Economic activity held up well in the first quarter of 2021 and rebounded by a strong 21.7% year on year in the second quarter. This was partly due to base effects, but also stemmed from robust household spending following the lifting of restrictions, and vigorous growth in industrial output and exports. Year-on-year growth in economic activity is likely to have slowed in the third quarter in part owing to a less favourable baseline. In line with these expectations, worsening consumer sentiment, slowing consumer credit growth and rising prices are likely to have weighed on domestic demand. That said, the seasonally adjusted manufacturing capacity utilisation rates for the third quarter were all substantially higher than a year earlier. We expect year-on-year growth in the fourth quarter to be slightly more constrained. A rise in covid-19 cases could result in the reimposition of restrictions, in turn constraining domestic demand growth and damaging the recovery of the tourism sector. There are downside risks to our estimate stemming from a volatile lira, high interest rates, high inflation, rising risk premiums and the continuing effects of the pandemic.
We expect economic growth to slow to 3.3% in 2022. Despite its structural shortcomings, Turkey's catch-up potential is considerable, and the economy is competitive. Normalising global economic conditions and still robust business confidence should support growth in that year. That said, uncertainties stem from Turkey's macroeconomic imbalances, the country's economic policy, geopolitics and the coronavirus situation globally pose downside risks. In 2023-26 we forecast average annual growth of 3.4%, which we believe is close to Turkey's medium-term potential.
Outlook for 2022-26: Inflation Inflation has been high in Turkey in recent years, mostly owing to the weakness of the lira. The problem has been exacerbated at times by loose monetary policy and mercurial monetary management. The situation has led to high inflationary expectations. In the wake of the CBT's decision to lower the headline interest rate in October, the lira slumped again. Rising global prices, including for energy raw materials, are adding to the inflationary pressures and annual inflation reached 19.9% in September. For the rest of 2021 a favourable base effect will be more than counterbalanced by persistent inflationary expectations, rising global prices, monetary loosening and a weak lira will keep inflation high, and we estimate inflation at an average of 18.1% in 2021-well above the central bank's 5% target.
In 2022 the base effect will be favourable and supply disruptions will diminish, but we expect inflation to remain elevated, at 15.8%, mainly because of continued lira volatility and monetary loosening. Aggressive monetary policy easing, high currency volatility, supply-side disruptions and rising global oil prices pose risks to this forecast. A favourable base effect, alongside declining commodity prices, will cause inflation to ease, but we still expect it to average 9.5% in 2023-26, owing to a weak lira against the US dollar.
Outlook for 2022-26: Exchange rates Since Mr Agbal's dismissal in March 2021, the lira has weakened. The lira hit an all-time low of about TL9.7:US$1 on October 24th in the wake of the CBT's cut to the repo rate despite rising inflation. The CBT may not cut the policy rate again this year, or only by 100 basis points in December, but the growing unpredictability of policymaking look set to prevent the currency from recovering and we expect the lira to end the year at TL9.7:US$1. Internal and external imbalances, elevated current-account deficits and still-high inflation, alongside a gradual normalisation of monetary policy in the US and the euro area, will all contribute to a depreciation of the lira against the US dollar in 2022-26. Policy unpredictability, poor international relations, foreign investors' concerns regarding the central bank's independence, and a reliance on short-term capital inflows will also weigh on the currency. As a result, we forecast that the lira will continue to follow a depreciatory path in 2022-26 (weakening by 8.3% in nominal terms on average).
Outlook for 2022-26: External sector We estimate that the current-account deficit will have shrunk to 2.8% of GDP in 2021, from 4.9% in 2020, and expect it to narrow gradually in 2022-26 as the economy rebalances and tourism earnings continue to recover. Attracting sufficient capital inflows to cover the deficit and service foreign debt, without drawdowns of foreign-exchange reserves, will be complicated by uncertainties relating to monetary and foreign policy. The sovereign increasingly relies on domestic financing (with support from the central bank), rather than tapping foreign funding sources.
The outlook for capital inflows remains uncertain, given global financial conditions and investor concerns about Turkey's economic management, which increases the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis. However, a balance-of-payments crisis is not our core forecast, as many banks will opt for short-term syndicated loans, which will allow them to roll over external debt.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 3.2 2.9 2.3 -3.7 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.6
EU27 GDP growth 3.0 2.1 1.8 -6.1 4.8 4.2 2.3 2.1 1.9 1.7
Western Europe growth 2.9 1.9 1.5 -6.1 5.1 4.2 2.2 2.0 1.9 1.7
World trade growth 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 9.0 5.8 4.8 4.1 4.0 4.0
US CPI 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 4.4 3.2 2.2 1.9 2.0 2.3
EU27 CPI 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.3 1.9 1.7 1.8 1.8 2.0
Manufactures export price 1.9 5.1 -1.4 0.2 6.8 1.0 1.9 2.2 2.6 2.5
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 71.7 78.5 66.0 61.0 55.5 53.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3 0.1
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.4 129.2 128.6 132.8 137.3 136.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Expenditure on GDP (TL bn at current market prices)
GDP 3,122 3,748 4,308 5,019 5,718 6,687 7,882 9,152 10,478 11,842
Private consumption 1,831 2,107 2,449 2,850 3,341 3,826 4,380 5,072 5,869 6,790
Government consumption 449 550 668 764 929 1,100 1,272 1,434 1,588 1,746
Gross fixed investment 933 1,115 1,118 1,373 1,638 1,870 2,116 2,392 2,696 3,038
Exports of goods & services 814 1,159 1,404 1,436 2,237 2,874 3,443 4,024 4,593 5,148
Imports of goods & services 930 1,180 1,295 1,637 2,398 2,950 3,296 3,738 4,235 4,849
Stockbuilding 26 -3 -36 232 -30 -33 -33 -33 -33 -33
Domestic demand 3,239 3,769 4,198 5,219 5,879 6,763 7,735 8,865 10,120 11,542
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 855.9 776.2 759.2 716.1 675.2 671.2 736.6 792.4 851.9 903.9
Private consumption 501.8 436.4 431.6 406.7 394.6 384.0 409.4 439.2 477.1 518.3
Government consumption 123.1 113.9 117.7 109.1 109.7 110.4 118.8 124.2 129.1 133.3
Gross fixed investment 255.7 231.0 197.0 195.9 193.4 187.7 197.8 207.1 219.2 231.9
Exports of goods & services 223.1 240.0 247.5 204.9 264.2 288.5 321.7 348.4 373.4 393.0
Imports of goods & services 255.0 244.5 228.2 233.6 283.2 296.1 308.1 323.7 344.3 370.1
Stockbuilding 7.2 -0.6 -6.3 33.0 -3.5 -3.3 -3.1 -2.9 -2.7 -2.5
Domestic demand 887.7 780.7 739.9 744.7 694.2 678.8 722.9 767.6 822.8 881.1
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 58.6 56.2 56.8 56.8 58.4 57.2 55.6 55.4 56.0 57.3
Government consumption 14.4 14.7 15.5 15.2 16.3 16.4 16.1 15.7 15.2 14.7
Gross fixed investment 29.9 29.8 25.9 27.4 28.6 28.0 26.8 26.1 25.7 25.7
Stockbuilding 0.8 -0.1 -0.8 4.6 -0.5 -0.5 -0.4 -0.4 -0.3 -0.3
Exports of goods & services 26.1 30.9 32.6 28.6 39.1 43.0 43.7 44.0 43.8 43.5
Imports of goods & services 29.8 31.5 30.1 32.6 41.9 44.1 41.8 40.8 40.4 40.9
Memorandum item
National savings ratio (%) 30.7 29.7 25.1 32.0 b 28.1 27.5 26.4 25.8 25.4 25.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Real expenditure on GDP (TL bn at constant 2009 prices)
GDP 1,703.2 1,757.8 1,769.8 1,799.4 1,943.1 2,007.5 2,072.2 2,141.3 2,215.8 2,293.8
Private consumption 1,019.0 1,027.2 1,040.7 1,072.9 1,140.4 1,161.4 1,179.6 1,208.0 1,248.9 1,303.9
Government consumption 230.1 245.3 255.7 260.9 269.8 276.8 285.1 294.5 302.8 311.3
Gross fixed investment 502.9 503.7 439.1 469.0 499.5 518.5 538.2 558.1 577.1 596.7
Exports of goods & services 395.8 429.4 449.9 384.3 454.3 487.9 521.1 546.6 569.0 586.6
Imports of goods & services 413.1 391.2 365.2 394.4 427.5 443.7 458.4 474.0 490.5 513.1
Stockbuilding -31.57 -56.57 -50.32 6.62 6.62 6.62 6.62 8.00 8.50 8.50
Domestic demand 1,720.5 1,719.6 1,685.1 1,809.4 1,916.3 1,963.3 2,009.5 2,068.6 2,137.3 2,220.3
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 7.4 3.2 0.7 1.7 8.0 3.3 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.5
Private consumption 5.9 0.8 1.3 3.1 6.3 1.8 1.6 2.4 3.4 4.4
Government consumption 5.2 6.6 4.2 2.1 3.4 2.6 3.0 3.3 2.8 2.8
Gross fixed investment 8.1 0.2 -12.8 6.8 6.5 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.4 3.4
Exports of goods & services 12.4 8.5 4.8 -14.6 18.2 7.4 6.8 4.9 4.1 3.1
Imports of goods & services 10.3 -5.3 -6.7 8.0 8.4 3.8 3.3 3.4 3.5 4.6
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.4 -1.5 0.4 3.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 7.0 -0.1 -2.0 7.4 5.9 2.5 2.4 2.9 3.3 3.9
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 3.6 0.5 0.8 1.8 3.8 1.1 0.9 1.4 1.9 2.5
Government consumption 0.7 0.9 0.6 0.3 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4
Gross fixed investment 2.4 0.0 -3.7 1.7 1.7 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.9
External balance 0.3 3.3 2.7 -5.4 2.0 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.3 -0.2
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Origin of GDP (TL bn at constant 2009 prices)
GDP at factor cost 1509.5 1,559.6 1,574.6 1,587.9 b 1,690.9 1,746.9 1,803.3 1,863.4 1,928.2 1,996.1
Agriculture 106.3 108.5 112.1 118.7 124.0 127.1 130.3 133.6 136.9 140.3
Industry 470.1 472.6 458.7 463.1 482.5 504.3 527.0 550.7 575.4 601.3
Services 933.1 978.5 1,003.8 1,006.1 1,084.4 1,115.5 1,146.0 1,179.1 1,215.8 1,254.4
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 4.9 2.1 3.3 5.9 4.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Industry 9.3 0.5 -2.9 1.0 4.2 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5
Services 7.6 4.9 2.6 0.2 7.8 2.9 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.2
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 6.8 6.4 7.0 7.3 7.1 7.0 7.0 6.9 6.8 6.8
Industry 32.8 32.9 30.3 30.5 29.4 29.7 30.1 30.5 30.8 31.0
Services 60.4 60.7 62.6 62.2 63.5 63.2 62.9 62.6 62.4 62.2
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) 8.7 1.6 -0.6 1.6 21.2 7.4 2.0 2.5 2.3 2.0
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 3.8 1.0 3.0 6.8 5.2 0.8 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.3
Total factor productivity growth 1.9 0.5 2.1 3.3 4.8 0.2 1.2 1.4 1.7 1.7
Growth of capital stock 7.0 6.5 4.1 4.4 4.2 4.1 4.1 4.1 4.0 3.9
Growth of potential GDP 6.7 4.2 4.2 1.3 6.5 2.1 4.1 4.2 4.4 3.4
Growth of real GDP 7.4 c 3.2 c 0.7 c 1.7 c 8.0 3.3 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.5
Growth of real GDP per head 5.7 c 1.7 c -0.6 c 0.6 c 7.1 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.0
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 81.1 82.3 83.4 84.3 a 85.0 85.6 86.0 86.3 86.7 87.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 855.9 776.2 759.2 716.1 a 675.2 671.2 736.7 792.5 852.1 904.1
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 10,550 9,430 9,100 8,490 a 7,940 7,850 8,570 9,180 9,830 10,380
Private consumption (US$ bn) 501.8 436.4 431.6 406.7 a 394.6 384.0 409.4 439.2 477.1 518.3
Private consumption per head (US$) 6,190 5,300 5,170 4,820 a 4,640 4,490 4,760 5,090 5,500 5,950
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2310.8 2441.9 2502.6 2575.0 2878.0 3062.5 3249.8 3432.0 3618.8 3832.5
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 28,490 29,660 30,000 30,530 33,840 35,790 37,810 39,760 41,740 43,980
Personal disposable income (TL bn) 1,917.5 b 2,206.9 b 2,564.7 b 2,998.0 3,514.6 4,059.4 4,688.6 5,476.2 6,390.8 7,458.0
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 525.6 b 457.1 b 452.0 b 427.8 415.0 407.5 438.2 474.1 519.6 569.3
Growth of real disposable income (%) 5.9 b 0.8 b 1.3 b 3.5 6.3 2.7 2.5 3.3 4.3 5.3
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 1.08 1.09 1.09 1.10 a 1.10 1.09 1.10 1.10 1.11 1.08
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.91 0.88 0.86 0.73 0.68 c 0.71 0.73 0.74 0.76 0.76
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 1.92 1.88 1.97 b 2.04 2.03 c 2.03 2.04 2.04 2.09 2.11
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.98 0.94 0.99 0.99 a 1.03 1.02 1.06 1.07 1.06 1.05
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 21.7 22.2 23.2 24.0 21.7 21.2 21.2 18.8 18.7 18.1
Interest 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.7 3.1 3.4 4.0 3.4 2.9 3.1
Non-interest 19.9 20.2 20.9 21.3 18.6 17.9 17.3 15.4 15.8 15.0
Government revenue 20.2 20.2 20.3 20.5 18.6 17.9 18.1 15.8 15.8 15.4
Budget balance -1.5 -1.9 -2.9 -3.4 -3.1 -3.3 -3.1 -3.0 -2.9 -2.7
Primary balance 0.3 0.0 -0.6 -0.8 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.4 0.0 0.4
Government debt 28.0 30.2 32.7 39.9 39.4 38.3 36.7 35.5 34.8 34.2
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 3.65 4.83 5.67 7.01 8.47 9.96 10.70 11.55 12.30 13.10
Exchange rate TL:US$ (year-end) 3.78 5.27 5.95 7.35 9.73 10.20 11.25 11.90 12.70 13.40
Exchange rate TL:€ (av) 4.12 5.70 6.35 8.00 10.06 11.61 12.28 13.57 14.94 16.24
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 73.9 b 63.3 b 61.7 b 55.3 49.6 48.4 50.3 49.5 48.6 47.3
Purchasing power parity TL:US$ (av) 1.35 1.53 1.72 1.95 1.99 2.18 2.43 2.67 2.90 3.09
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 15.7 19.1 26.1 36.0 18.3 22.7 21.4 15.2 16.0 13.2
Domestic credit growth (%) 19.0 18.1 16.1 39.0 11.0 20.6 23.1 16.6 15.4 13.7
Lending rate (av; %) 15.8 23.7 20.4 12.9 20.8 18.6 15.5 12.8 11.4 10.6
Deposit rate (av; %) 12.4 18.1 18.8 10.8 18.5 16.9 13.5 10.5 8.8 7.8
3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 12.8 19.8 20.7 11.2 19.4 17.5 14.0 11.2 9.4 8.5
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 31.5 32.2 32.5 30.7 30.8 31.0 31.7 32.4 33.1 33.3
Labour force (% change) 3.5 2.2 0.9 -5.5 0.4 0.6 2.3 2.2 2.1 0.4
Employment (m) 28.1 28.7 28.0 26.7 27.4 28.1 28.8 29.4 30.1 30.7
Employment (% change) 3.5 2.2 -2.3 -4.8 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.3 2.2 2.2
Unemployment (m) 3.4 3.5 4.5 4.0 3.4 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.5
Unemployment rate (%) 10.9 10.9 13.8 13.2 13.0 12.3 11.8 11.2 10.7 10.0
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
Consumer prices (av) 11.1 16.3 15.2 12.3 18.1 15.8 12.7 9.7 8.2 7.4
Consumer prices (year-end) 11.7 20.1 11.8 14.6 18.9 14.2 11.1 8.9 7.8 7.3
Producer prices (av) 15.8 27.0 17.6 12.2 39.3 29.4 19.5 18.0 9.5 7.4
GDP deflator (av) 10.9 16.3 14.2 14.6 b 5.5 13.2 14.2 12.4 10.7 9.2
Private consumption deflator (av) 11.1 14.2 14.7 12.9 10.3 12.4 12.7 13.1 11.9 10.8
Government consumption deflator (av) 10.7 14.8 16.6 12.2 17.6 15.4 12.2 9.2 7.8 6.9
Fixed investment deflator (av) 13.1 19.4 14.9 15.0 12.0 10.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0
Average nominal wages 13.2 b 14.6 b 21.0 b 14.0 b 14.8 14.0 13.0 13.0 13.0 13.0
Average real wages 1.9 b -1.5 b 5.0 b 1.5 b -2.8 -1.6 0.2 3.1 4.4 5.2
Unit labour costs (TL-based; av) d 11.6 b 16.0 b 20.0 b 9.2 b 11.6 15.6 14.7 14.4 14.1 14.1
Unit labour costs (US$-based) d -7.6 b -12.4 b 2.1 b -11.6 b -7.6 -1.7 6.8 6.0 7.1 7.1
Labour costs per hour (TL) d 17.9 b 20.5 b 24.8 b 28.2 b 32.4 36.9 41.7 47.2 53.3 60.2
Labour costs per hour (US$) 4.9 b 4.2 b 4.4 b 4.0 b 3.8 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts. d Manufacturing only: public and private sectors.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -40.8 -21.7 5.3 -35.0 -18.6 -18.5 -14.3 -12.0 -12.0 -11.2
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.8 -2.8 0.7 -4.9 -2.8 -2.7 -1.9 -1.5 -1.4 -1.2
Goods: exports fob 169.2 178.9 182.2 168.4 218.4 230.9 250.9 264.4 276.0 283.9
Goods: imports fob -227.8 -219.6 -199.0 -206.3 -244.8 -254.0 -265.0 -274.6 -285.0 -293.5
Trade balance -58.6 -40.7 -16.8 -37.9 -26.4 -23.2 -14.0 -10.2 -9.0 -9.6
Services: credit 53.5 58.6 62.7 35.4 40.3 42.3 43.2 46.5 49.4 54.2
Services: debit -27.1 -28.5 -28.7 -23.9 -26.6 -28.2 -31.2 -35.2 -38.9 -41.5
Services balance 26.3 30.2 34.1 11.5 13.7 14.0 12.0 11.3 10.5 12.7
Primary income: credit 5.0 6.1 6.3 6.8 8.9 4.3 5.0 5.0 5.3 5.7
Primary income: debit -16.1 -18.1 -19.2 -15.6 -14.9 -13.7 -17.4 -17.9 -18.6 -19.6
Primary income balance -11.1 -11.9 -12.8 -8.8 -6.0 -9.4 -12.3 -13.0 -13.2 -13.9
Secondary income: credit 4.5 2.8 2.7 4.2 3.9 3.9 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.7
Secondary income: debit -2.0 -2.0 -1.9 -4.0 -3.8 -3.8 -4.2 -4.5 -4.8 -5.1
Secondary income balance 2.5 0.8 0.8 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.4
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 91.8 b 94.3 90.3 89.0 b 102.6 106.1 110.2 114.4 118.3 121.4
Export prices (% change) 1.8 b 2.8 -4.3 -1.4 b 15.2 3.5 3.9 3.8 3.4 2.6
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 87.8 b 93.7 89.9 84.3 b 96.2 97.3 97.2 98.7 101.6 104.8
Import prices (% change) 7.4 b 6.7 -4.1 -6.2 b 14.2 1.1 -0.2 1.5 3.0 3.2
Terms of trade (2010=100) 104.5 b 100.7 100.4 105.6 b 106.6 109.0 113.4 116.0 116.5 115.8
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 7.7 b 2.4 b -0.9 b -8.7 b 8.8 7.5 5.2 3.6 3.1 3.2
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ m)
Inward direct investment 11,042 12,822 9,266 7,939 7,000 8,000 9,356 11,067 12,035 12,987
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 1.3 1.7 1.2 1.1 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 4.3 5.6 4.7 4.1 3.6 4.3 4.7 5.3 5.5 5.6
Outward direct investment -2,703 -3,587 -2,943 -3,240 -3,000 -3,200 -2,890 -3,000 -3,145 -3,096
Net foreign direct investment 8,339 9,235 6,323 4,699 4,000 4,800 6,466 8,067 8,890 9,891
Stock of foreign direct investment 180,258 193,080 202,346 210,285 217,285 225,285 234,641 245,708 257,743 270,730
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 2,222 2,345 2,425 2,493 2,555 2,633 2,730 2,847 2,973 3,107
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 21.1 24.9 26.7 29.4 32.2 33.6 31.9 31.0 30.2 29.9
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.51 2.75 0.88 0.77 0.62 0.66 0.74 0.85 0.88 0.92
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.60 0.60 0.59 0.63 0.59 0.57 0.57 0.58 0.58 0.59
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 456.6 446.0 440.8 435.9 a 435.6 455.1 475.1 480.8 488.7 494.1
Total external debt (% of GDP) 53.3 57.5 58.1 60.9 a 64.5 67.8 64.5 60.7 57.4 54.7
Debt/exports ratio (%) 152.6 144.2 132.9 162.1 117.4 121.0 119.3 112.3 108.3 105.1
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 37.9 34.4 34.5 41.2 29.2 25.0 25.4 26.5 24.9 24.8
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU
Global data Global data
OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
Domestic data GDP growth and components: TurkStat
Population: UN Population database and EIU interpolation
Consumer prices: IMF, IFS; TurkStat
Industrial production: derived from OECD, Main Economic Indicators
Exchange rates and interest rates: IMF, IFS
External trade and balance of payments: IMF, IFS; Central Bank of Turkey; TurkStat
Central government financial balance: IMF, IFS; Turkish Treasury
Foreign direct investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report; Central Bank of Turkey
Abbreviations IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
TurkStat: Turkish Statistical Institute
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development

Subject: Tax rates; Privatization; Macroeconomics; Foreign exchange rates; Coups d'etat; Politics; International relations; Research & development expenditures; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Patronage; Presidents; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Central banks; Economic growth; COVID-19; Foreign policy; Tax evasion; Economic forecasts; Interest rates

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Privatization Macroeconomics Foreign exchange rates International relations Research & development expenditures International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Central banks Economic growth Tax evasion Economic forecasts Interest rates; Industry: 92111 :‎ Executive Offices 52111 :‎ Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Location: Turkey; Middle East

People: Erdogan, Recep Tayyip

Company / organization: Name: Justice & Development Party-Turkey; NAICS: 813940

Classification: 92111: Executive Offices; 52111: Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Identifier / keyword: Turkey; Middle East

Title: Country Forecast Turkey November 2021 Updater

Publication title: Country Forecast. Turkey; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Nov 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09668632

e-ISSN: 20489730

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Statistics, Country Report

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611014273

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-turkey-november-2021-updater/docview/2611014273/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Montenegro 4th Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-montenegro-4th-quarter-2021/docview/2657127281/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Montenegro&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Montenegro+4th+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-11-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Montenegro&amp;rft.issn=17564301&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Montenegro; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Montenegro; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Montenegro 4th Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Montenegro; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Nov 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 17564301

e-ISSN: 20475772

Sourcetype: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2657127281

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-montenegro-4th-quarter-2021/docview/2657127281/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-04-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Slovenia 4th Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-slovenia-4th-quarter-2021/docview/2657118183/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Slovenia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Slovenia+4th+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-11-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Slovenia&amp;rft.issn=13664131&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Slovenia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Slovenia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Slovenia 4th Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Slovenia; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Nov 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 13664131

e-ISSN: 20475802

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2657118183

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-slovenia-4th-quarter-2021/docview/2657118183/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-04-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Romania October 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-romania-october-2021/docview/2651018278/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Romania&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Romania+October+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-10-19&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Romania&amp;rft.issn=13564102&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Romania; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Romania; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Romania October 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Romania; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Oct 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13564102

e-ISSN: 20475713

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2651018278

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-romania-october-2021/docview/2651018278/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-04-17

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Bolivia October 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-bolivia-october-2021/docview/2650353824/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Bolivia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Bolivia+October+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-10-18&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Bolivia&amp;rft.issn=13564072&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Bolivia; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Bolivia; Latin America

Title: Country Report Bolivia October 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Bolivia; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Oct 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13564072

e-ISSN: 20474407

Source type: Report

Languageof publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2650353824

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-bolivia-october-2021/docview/2650353824/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-04-16

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Netherlands October 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-netherlands-october-2021/docview/2648647618/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Netherlands&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Netherlands+October+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-10-12&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Netherlands&amp;rft.issn=02696134&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Netherlands; Western Europe

Identifier / keyword: Netherlands; Western Europe

Title: Country Report Netherlands October 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Netherlands; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Oct 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02696134

e-ISSN: 20475438

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2648647618

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-netherlands-october-2021/docview/2648647618/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-04-10

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Argentina October 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-argentina-october-2021/docview/2648357685/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Argentina&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Argentina+October+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-10-11&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Argentina&amp;rft.issn=02694212&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Argentina; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Argentina; Latin America

Title: Country Report Argentina October 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Argentina; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Oct 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 02694212

e-ISSN: 20474237

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2648357685

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-argentina-october-2021/docview/2648357685/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-04-09

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Nigeria October 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-nigeria-october-2021/docview/2644706745/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Nigeria&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Nigeria+October+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-10-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Nigeria&amp;rft.issn=02694204&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Nigeria; Africa

Identifier / keyword: Nigeria; Africa

Title: Country Report Nigeria October 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Nigeria; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Oct 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02694204

e-ISSN: 20475462

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2644706745

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-nigeria-october-2021/docview/2644706745/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-03-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Ireland October 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-ireland-october-2021/docview/2644706711/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Ireland&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Ireland+October+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-10-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Ireland&amp;rft.issn=02695278&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Ireland; Western Europe

Identifier / keyword: Ireland; Western Europe

Title: Country Report Ireland October 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Ireland; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Oct 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695278

e-ISSN: 20475047

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2644706711

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-ireland-october-2021/docview/2644706711/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-03-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Venezuela October 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-october-2021/docview/2644706691/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Venezuela+October+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-10-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=13507133&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Report Venezuela October 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Venezuela; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Oct 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507133

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2644706691

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-october-2021/docview/2644706691/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-03-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Turkey October 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-turkey-october-2021/docview/2644703570/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Turkey&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Turkey+October+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-10-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Turkey&amp;rft.issn=02695464&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Turkey; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Turkey; Middle East

Title: Country Report Turkey October 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Turkey; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Oct 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695464

e-ISSN: 20475977

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2644703570

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-turkey-october-2021/docview/2644703570/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-03-30

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Turkey October 2021 Updater

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-turkey-october-2021-updater/docview/2611016725/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 8.0 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.5 Consumer price inflation (%) 17.1 14.1 12.1 9.3 8.2 7.4 Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.2 -3.3 -3.0 -3.0 -2.8 -2.7 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.0 -2.9 -2.3 -1.2 -0.8 -0.9 3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 19.8 18.0 14.4 11.5 8.7 7.4 Exchange rate TL: Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 84.3 Population growth 1.4 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 716 Real GDP growth 3.2 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,575b Real domestic demand growth 3.3 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 8,490 Inflation 12.5 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 30,531b Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.0 Exchange rate (av) TL: To win seats, parties need at least 10% of the national vote. Since the failed coup, power has been increasingly concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan, the AKP leader, who was re-elected for a second presidential term in June 2018. Negative real interest rates and high political risks have led to inadequate capital inflows into Turkey and raise the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Turkey&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Turkey+October+2021+Updater&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-10-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Turkey&amp;rft.issn=09668632&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - The re-election of Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president, in June 2018 concluded Turkey's shift from a parliamentary to a presidential republic. EIU expects Mr Erdogan and his conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) to stay in power until at least 2023 (when the next pres-idential and parliamentary elections are due), maintaining a tight grip on national institutions and the media in order to continue to dominate Turkish politics.
- The economy has become less stable as a result of domestic political tensions, fraught international relations and unorthodox economic policies. This has jeopardised the hard-won improvements in macroeconomic stability on which the AKP built much of its previous electoral success. The government's unorthodox and unpredictable policies in response to the coronavirus outbreak have created further sources of economic instability.
- Turkey's foreign policy priorities have shifted under the AKP since the early 2000s. Declining trust in the US and the EU, a gradual shift to a multipolar world and an ambition to make Turkey a regional power have all incentivised the AKP to pursue a "Turkey first" approach to foreign policy. Turkey is at odds with its peers in the eastern Mediterranean over maritime borders and vast offshore gas reserves. The risk of military confrontation with Greece, in particular, has risen. Mediation of the conflict by Germany and the US will be vital to de-escalate the volatile situation. Turkey has openly backed Azerbaijan in its military conflict with Armenia over Nagorny Karabakh, and has deployed peacekeeping troops to the region, alongside Russian troops.
- A more favourable external environment, together with the strength of Turkey's industrial sector, continues to underpin our view that the economy will have accelerated to an estimated 8% in 2021. We expect average growth of 3.4% per year in 2022-26-short of the government's annual 5% target, but close to Turkey's medium-term potential.
- Turkey's heavy reliance on often volatile, short-term capital inflows to fund lending and drive economic growth leaves the economy vulnerable to sudden shifts in investor sentiment. However, the country's location and its large consumer market make it an attractive place to do business.

Country forecast overview: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 8.0 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.5
Consumer price inflation (%) 17.1 14.1 12.1 9.3 8.2 7.4
Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.2 -3.3 -3.0 -3.0 -2.8 -2.7
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.0 -2.9 -2.3 -1.2 -0.8 -0.9
3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 19.8 18.0 14.4 11.5 8.7 7.4
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 8.29 9.58 10.68 11.50 12.28 12.90
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
Country forecast overview: Business environment rankings                
Value of index a     Global rank b     Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26
6.16 6.24   45 54   17 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

- Turkey's business environment score increases slightly in the forecast period (2022-26). However, the country's global ranking drops by nine places, to 54th, and it falls to last place in the regional ranking. Political tensions, increased powers concentrated under the president, a politicised central bank and high domestic inflation have raised uncertainty about the direction of economic policy.

Country forecast overview: Turkey's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: Adverse market conditions delay any reform momentum and privatisation deals.
2024-26: Networks of patronage remain a constraint on the free market. Competition is still limited in several sectors.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) has been a government priority, but macroeconomic instability, increased nationalism, and concerns about security, corruption and politicisation of the judicial system will curb inflows.
2024-26: Further privatisation and government incentives to attract investment in major sectors could boost FDI inflows.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: The threat of sanctions from the US and the EU continues to hurt Turkey's trade and investment environment.
2024-26: Negotiations with the EU to update the customs union are likely to be protracted, given poor Turkish-EU relations.
Taxes 2022-23: Finance minister will reintroduce a more prudent approach to public finances. No tax rises in 2023 election year.
2024-26: Tax collection capacity will improve, but tax evasion remains an issue.
Financing 2022-23: The Central Bank of Turkey continues its monetary easing cycle. Government lending policy leads to a sharp increase in contingent liabilities.
2024-26: The government reverts to relying on state banks to extend credit and support economic growth. Continued reliance on capital inflows amid tighter global liquidity continues. Contingent liabilities remain problematic.
The labour market 2022-23: Government measures to support employment and ban lay-offs end. The inactivity rate continues to rise and the size of the shadow economy increases.
2024-26: Some improvements for employers, with legislation on severance pay and more flexible employment regulation.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Next stage of Istanbul airport is operational. Slower progress made on other projects, including Istanbul Canal.
2024-26: Landmark road and bridge projects near completion. New industrial zones become operational. Other major urban infrastructure projects around Istanbul could progress. Nevertheless, gaps and bottlenecks may persist.
Technological readiness 2022-23: Spending on research and development remains moderate, at about 1% of GDP, holding back efforts to move the economy up the value-added ladder.
2024-26: Turkey's young population spurs further rapid digital transformation of the banking sector.
Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 84.3 Population growth 1.4
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 716 Real GDP growth 3.2
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,575 b Real domestic demand growth 3.3
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 8,490 Inflation 12.5
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 30,531 b Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.0
Exchange rate (av) TL:US$ 7.01 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.5
a Actual. b EIU estimates.
Background: The Turkish Republic was formed in 1923. Nationalist resistance forces led by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk defeated the occupying allies after the first world war, establishing the country's current borders. Since then, Turkey's political and economic structure has been oriented towards the West. The country became a member of the Council of Europe in 1949 and NATO in 1952, and signed an association agreement with the then European Community in 1963. A customs union with the EU took effect in 1996. EU accession negotiations were opened in 2005, but progress has been slow, as Turkey's Western-EU anchor has weakened over the past decade. Under current political circumstances accession will not be possible in 2021-25.
Political structure: Turkey is a centralised secular democratic state, but checks and balances are limited and its secular character has been weakened by the religious conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP), which came to power in 2002. Turkey has a history of military coups-in 1960, 1971 and 1980-leading to periods of military rule. There was a failed coup in July 2016. Turkey has had a presidential system of government, in place since the president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, changed the parliamentary system in 2018, with parliament elected for a five-year term. To win seats, parties need at least 10% of the national vote. Since the failed coup, power has been increasingly concentrated in the hands of Mr Erdogan, the AKP leader, who was re-elected for a second presidential term in June 2018.
Policy issues: Maintaining macroeconomic stability and stabilising the lira since the pandemic began in 2020 are the major policy challenges. The government rolled out a large fiscal stimulus to support the economy in 2020 and is using its state banks to expand credit growth. This has led to major external imbalances and a sharp lira sell-off. Negative real interest rates and high political risks have led to inadequate capital inflows into Turkey and raise the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis. The Kurdish issue, which has blocked economic development in the south east, is an important challenge, but peace talks with the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) collapsed in July 2015, and there has been a resurgence in violence. Politicisation of the judiciary since the coup attempt has undermined its independence. Corruption and patronage are widespread.
Taxation: The corporation tax rate was raised from 20% to 22% in 2018. Personal income tax rates range between 15% and 35%. In January 2020 the highest marginal tax rate was raised from 35% to 40% for incomes of more than TL500,000 (US$69,000). Reducing tax evasion was one of the elements of previous IMF programmes, but compliance remains weak.
Foreign trade: In 2020 goods exports totalled US$168.4bn and imports about US$206.3bn, creating a trade deficit of about US$37.9bn. This drove a current-account deficit of US$37.3bn (3% of GDP).
Major exports 2020 % of total Major imports 2020 % of total
Transport equipment 31.0 Fuels 5.2
Textiles & clothing 17.5 Chemicals 14.7
Agro-industry 10.9 Machinery 11.5
Iron & steel 6.3 Transport equipment 9.5
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
Germany 9.9 China 11.0
UK 7.0 Germany 10.4
US 6.3 Russia 8.5
Iraq 5.7 US 5.5
Outlook for 2022-26: Political stability Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president, and his conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) have dominated Turkey's political scene since 2002. During this period they have tightened their grip on authority, replacing Turkey's parliamentary system with an executive presidential system in 2018. The economy has become less stable as a result of political tensions, fraught international relations and unorthodox economic policies. This has jeopardised the hard-won improvements in macroeconomic stability on which the AKP built much of its previous electoral success.
Almost all obligatory coronavirus-related restrictions were lifted in early July. Mr Erdogan and the AKP may have benefited politically from the reopening of services sectors, but the government's poor handling of wildfires and floods in August (including the absence of functioning firefighting aircraft in the country) has put pressure on both and may further dent their level of popular support. Rising prices and a weak lira, alongside public dissatisfaction with widespread corruption, are also damaging the government. In a sign of rising factionalism within the AKP, Sedat Peker, a former government protégé and supporter, has targeted the interior minister, Suleyman Soylu, with allegations of corruption (Mr Soylu has denied the claim) and continues to draw attention to other allegations against current and former politicians.
Despite declining popularity levels, Mr Erdogan will continue to dominate Turkish politics through a mixture of authoritarianism, control of state resources and the bureaucracy, and his still-strong personal popularity, all aided by a largely supportive domestic media. The government will continue to clamp down on domestic political opposition in 2022-26. Some political opponents of the government will also remain in prison on alleged terrorism charges, including a number of Kurdish opposition politicians.
Anti-refugee sentiment is high in Turkey, and the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan will only make this more central to the politics of Mr Erdogan and the AKP. Discussions have also begun on a new constitution, to be enacted in early 2022. This could include processes to ensure that Mr Erdogan stays in power beyond 2028, when his second term as president would end (assuming, as seems likely, that he is re-elected in 2023), as well as a strengthening of parliamentary powers. Mr Erdogan also plans to introduce economic and judicial reforms and to improve human rights and strengthen property rights, which should appease Western governments and foreign investors. However, we expect only limited progress to be made, especially on the human rights front, in 2022-26.
Outlook for 2022-26: Election watch Presidential and parliamentary elections will be held in 2023. Mr Erdogan was re-elected president in June 2018, with 52.6% of the vote. At the parliamentary election, held at the same time, the Islamist-rooted AKP lost its absolute majority, although it secured a coalition majority with the small, right-wing Nationalist Action Party (MHP). The election process appeared to be mostly free but largely unfair; opposition candidates received little or no domestic media coverage.
Several parties are now competing against Mr Erdogan for conservative and right-of-centre votes. Recent polls (from mid-September) gave the Good Party (IP) just under 13% of the vote. The IP has allied itself with the perennial main opposition party, the Republican People's Party (CHP; which got about 25% of the vote). Together they pose a threat to the AKP (which garnered about 32%) and its right-wing ally, the MHP (which received less than 10%). In the presidential election Mr Erdogan is currently leading.
EIU expects Mr Erdogan and the AKP to win the next presidential and parliamentary elections because of their popularity among Turkey's conservative voter base, the president's dominance of the media and the government's systematic clampdown on political opposition. A change in the electoral law (including increasing the threshold to enter parliament) is likely to be enacted in 2022 to bolster the AKP's prospects.
Outlook for 2022-26: International relations The AKP and Mr Erdogan are seeking to bolster Turkey's standing as a regional power in the Middle East. This increasingly assertive foreign policy-including reg-arding Azerbaijan, Syria and the eastern Mediterranean-has also helped the AKP to distract Turkish citizens from other domestic economic and political concerns. However, this approach is isolating Turkey in the region and internationally.
Turkey is on a collision course with a fellow NATO member, Greece, which it has antagonised by its continuous deployment of an energy exploration research vessel in disputed waters in the gas-rich eastern Mediterranean. In December 2020 these prospecting activities led the EU to impose sanctions on Turkish energy officials and threaten wider action, but tensions have eased of late.
Turkish-US relations have been strained by Turkey's purchase of the Russian-made S-400 defence system in 2019, despite the country's membership of NATO. In response the US introduced sanctions in December 2020, but these are mild and target Turkey's defence procurement agency-cutting Turkey off from US military hardware and technology. There is a risk that the US will impose stronger sanctions (for instance, if Turkey activates the S-400 defence system). In the worst-case scenario, Turkey could be denied access to inter-national financial institutions, but we expect US policy to continue emphasising the need to keep Turkey in the Western camp.
Given the fragility of the economy and the vulnerability of the lira, Turkey can ill afford deeper rows with the US and the EU. Nevertheless, we do not expect any improvement in Turkey's relations with the EU or the US in 2022-26. In May 2021 the European Parliament called for suspension of the country's accession talks owing to lack of democracy and extensive violations of basic freedoms.
Outlook for 2022-26: Policy trends The economic downturn in 2020 led to the biggest credit growth boom in a decade, facilitated by Turkey's state-owned banks and a politicised central bank. This has kept inflation high, owing to lira depreciation against all other major currencies. In November 2020 Mr Erdogan moved a step closer to policy normality and transparency by appointing a former finance minister, Naci Agbal (who is known for championing orthodox monetary policies), as central bank governor. However, he replaced Mr Agbal in March 2021, following a rise in the policy rate from 17% to 19%, damaging financial market sentiment and adding to the unpredictability of Turkey's policies. The new governor, Sahap Kavcioglu, a former member of parliament and official at Halkbank, a Turkish state bank, is a critic of Mr Abgal's policies. Mr Kavcioglu has stated his commit-ment to reducing inflation. However, he cut the rate to 18% in September despite rising inflation. The rate appears to be the result of political pressure from the president.
A fresh lockdown came into force in April, but almost all obligatory restrictions were lifted on July 1st. Despite rising coronavirus cases-Turkey is reporting 27,327 new infections on average each day, which corresponds to 45% of the peak (reported on April 20th 2021)-we do not expect stringent restrictions to be reimposed. About 52% of the population had been fully vaccinated as at end-September.
Turkey's economy has displayed resilience during previous bouts of political instability and market volatility, owing to a prudent approach to the public finances, effective capitalisation of the banking sector, and a dynamic and diversified private sector. However, other shortcomings, such as cronyism and corruption, skills mismatches and tax evasion, are unlikely to be effectively addressed in the forecast period. Reforms to address the structural imbalances that underlie Turkey's recurring boom-and-bust economic cycle are needed. There is a risk that the government will revert to its preferred policy of unsustainable rapid credit growth, which could cause a sudden credit stop and a potential balance-of-payments crisis. There is also a risk of US financial sanctions, which would further impede Turkey's ability to attract foreign-currency inflows and restrict its access to global debt markets.
Outlook for 2022-26: Fiscal policy The budget deficit reached 3.4% of GDP in 2020, as coronavirus-related restrictions hit revenue growth and the government deferred collection of some tax and social security premium payments. In 2021 we estimate the deficit at 3.2% of GDP. The finance minister reintroduced a more prudent approach to the public finances in an effort to recover policy credibility and reassure investors. Further rises in indirect taxes, a restructuring scheme for tax payments and a rise in corporate income tax to 25% should also benefit the budget this year.
Ahead of the election in 2023, we expect the deficit to stay elevated, averaging 3.2% of GDP per year in 2022-23. It will then narrow to an average of 2.8% of GDP in 2024-26 as the government reins in spending to reassure investors. Government debt reached 40% of GDP at end-2020, and will gradually fall to 34.3% at end-2025.
Outlook for 2022-26: Monetary policy The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) adopted an ultra-loose policy in the early stages of the coronavirus crisis, pushing real rates firmly into negative territory. This helped economic activity to recover via a credit boom, but also contributed to a lira sell-off, a rapid loss of foreign-exchange reserves and high inflation. From August the bank began to tighten policy. It raised its main policy rate-the one-week repurchase (repo) rate-by a total of 1,075 basis points to 19% between September 2020 and March 2021. The MPC had kept the repo rate unchanged since Mr Kavcioglu's appointment in March 2021, arguing that it was maintaining the policy rate at a level above inflation. However, the CBT is widely believed to have its hands tied by Mr Erdogan, who argues that high interest rates are the cause of inflation. The MPC reduced the repo rate to 18% at its September 23rd meeting, despite rising inflation, meaning the policy rate is now lower than annual inflation. We believe that the CBT will reduce its policy rate again by the end of this year, depending on the course of inflation and the degree of pressure exerted by Mr Erdogan. However, weak capital flows, and the high risk premium and level of dollarisation will limit rate cuts. Real rates will return to positive territory, which should help to keep investors on board. In 2022-26 we expect rates to be cut again as inflationary pressures decline. Foreign-exchange reserves are rising owing to swap agreements, reserve requirement arrangements, IMF funding and gold from ore. We expect foreign-exchange reserves to increase in 2022-26, but only gradually, as efforts by the bank to limit depreciation of the local currency and a renewed increase in the dollarisation rate of lira deposits will limit growth.
Outlook for 2022-26: Economic growth Turkey's economy grew by 1.7% in 2020, making the country one of only two of the major G20 economies that recorded growth amid the coronavirus pandemic (the other being China). In 2021 we estimate economic growth of 8%, driven by domestic and foreign demand. Economic activity held up well in the first quarter of 2021 and rebounded by a strong 21.7% in the second quarter. This was partly owing to base effects, but also stemmed from robust household spending following the lifting of restrictions, and vigorous growth in industrial output and exports. The lifting of restrictions abroad also supported the tourism sector. Year-on-year growth in economic activity is likely to have persisted in the third quarter, albeit at a more modest rate, owing to a higher baseline. In line with these expectations, the seasonally adjusted manufacturing capacity utilisation rates for the third quarter were all substantially higher than a year earlier. We expect year-on-year growth in the fourth quarter to be slightly more constrained. The rise in Covid-19 cases since mid-July could result in the reimposition of restrictions, in turn constraining domestic demand growth and damaging the recovery of the tourism sector. There are downside risks to our forecast stemming from a volatile lira, high interest rates, high inflation, rising risk premiums and the continuing effects of the pandemic. Further uncertainties stem from Turkey's macroeconomic imbalances, the country's economic policy, geopolitics and the coronavirus situation globally.
To strengthen investor confidence beyond 2021, additional reforms-such as guaranteeing the independence of the central bank and reducing government involvement in the banking sector-would be required. Nonetheless, despite its structural shortcomings, Turkey's catch-up potential is considerable, and the economy is competitive, which underpins our view that GDP will grow by 3.3% in 2022. In 2023-26 we forecast average annual growth of 3.4%, which we believe is close to Turkey's medium-term potential.
Outlook for 2022-26: Inflation Inflation averaged 12.3% in 2020. Monetary policy has been tightened since late 2020, but inflation kept increasing in 2021 owing to high commodity prices, the lifting of Covid-related restrictions and a weak lira, which raised the domestic prices of imported goods and inputs. Inflation rose to a more than two-year high of 19.3% in August. A favourable base effect will cause inflation to ease by year-end, but persistent inflationary expectations, rising global prices, monetary loosening and a weak lira will keep inflation high on average in 2021, at an estimated 17.1%-well above the central bank's 5% target. In 2022 supply disruptions will diminish, but we expect inflationary pressures to remain elevated, at 14.1%, mainly because of continued lira volatility and monetary loosening. Aggressive monetary policy easing, high currency volatility, supply-side disruptions and rising global oil prices pose risks to this forecast. A favourable base effect, alongside declining commodity prices, will cause inflation to ease, but we still expect it to average 9.3% in 2023-26, owing to a weak lira.
Outlook for 2022-26: Exchange rates The lira depreciated by 19% against the US dollar on average in 2020. The lira was bolstered by the appointment of a new central bank governor at end-2020, who promptly embarked on an explicit tightening of monetary policy. However, since Mr Agbal's sudden dismissal by the president in March 2021, the lira has weakened again. The lira reached a historically weak TL8.8:US$1 in September, as the CBT cut the repo rate despite rising inflation. Mr Agbal's successor as governor, Mr Kavcioglu, has increasingly sought to reassure markets that interest rates would not be cut prematurely, but Mr Erdogan's known preference for low rates is likely to be putting pressure on the MPC of the CBT. The central bank is likely to cut the policy rate again this year and we expect the lira to end the year at TL9:US$1. Internal and external imbalances, elevated current-account deficits and still-high inflation, alongside a gradual normalisation of monetary policy in the US and the euro area, will all contribute to a depreciation of the lira against the dollar in 2022-26. Policy unpredictability, poor international relations, foreign investors' concerns regarding the central bank's independence, and a reliance on short-term capital inflows will also weigh on the currency. As a result, we forecast that the lira will continue to follow a depreciatory path in 2022-26 (weakening by 7.9% in nominal terms on average).
Outlook for 2022-26: External sector The current-account deficit amounted to 5.2% of GDP in 2020. We estimate that the deficit will have shrunk to 3% of GDP in 2021, and expect it to narrow gradually in 2022-26 as the economy rebalances and tourism earnings recover. Attracting sufficient capital inflows to cover the deficit and service foreign debt, without drawdowns of foreign-exchange reserves, will be complicated by uncertainties relating to monetary and foreign policy. The sovereign increasingly relies on domestic financing (with support from the central bank), rather than tapping foreign funding sources.
The outlook for capital inflows remains uncertain, given global financial conditions and investor concerns about Turkey's economic management, which increases the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis. However, Turkey has faced several such crises in the past without resorting to capital controls, which Mr Erdogan strongly opposes. Furthermore, a balance-of-payments crisis is not our core forecast, as many banks will opt for short-term syndicated loans, which will allow them to roll over external debt.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 3.1 2.9 2.3 -3.7 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.5
EU27 GDP growth 3.0 2.1 1.8 -6.1 4.6 4.3 2.4 2.1 1.9 1.7
Western Europe growth 2.8 1.9 1.4 -6.1 4.9 4.3 2.2 2.0 1.9 1.7
World trade growth 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 9.0 5.6 4.8 4.2 4.1 3.8
US CPI 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0 2.3
EU27 CPI 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.1 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8 2.0
Manufactures export price 1.9 5.1 -1.4 0.2 7.2 1.6 1.7 2.0 2.6 4.1
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5 53.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3 0.1
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 130.1 129.8 128.6 132.8 135.9 136.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Expenditure on GDP (TL bn at current market prices)
GDP 3,122.4 3,747.9 4,307.6 5,018.5 5,733.1 6,701.4 7,835.1 9,076.0 10,392.1 11,758.7
Private consumption 1,830.7 2,107.0 2,448.6 2,850.1 3,341.2 3,825.6 4,380.3 5,072.4 5,868.8 6,790.2
Government consumption 449.1 549.7 667.8 764.4 921.7 1,074.6 1,235.6 1,389.4 1,539.1 1,692.0
Gross fixed investment 932.7 1,115.4 1,117.6 1,373.3 1,638.1 1,870.4 2,116.2 2,392.0 2,695.9 3,038.4
Exports of goods & services 814.0 1,159.0 1,404.2 1,436.1 2,204.1 2,795.8 3,404.2 3,947.7 4,502.9 5,036.8
Imports of goods & services 930.2 1,180.5 1,294.6 1,636.9 2,342.0 2,831.9 3,268.2 3,692.5 4,181.6 4,765.8
Stockbuilding 26.1 -2.8 -35.9 231.6 -30.0 -33.0 -33.0 -33.0 -33.0 -33.0
Domestic demand 3,238.6 3,769.4 4,198.0 5,219.4 5,870.9 6,737.6 7,699.1 8,820.8 10,070.7 11,487.7
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 855.9 776.2 759.2 716.1 691.8 699.9 734.0 789.2 846.6 911.5
Private consumption 501.8 436.4 431.6 406.7 403.2 399.5 410.3 441.1 478.1 526.4
Government consumption 123.1 113.9 117.7 109.1 111.2 112.2 115.7 120.8 125.4 131.2
Gross fixed investment 255.7 231.0 197.0 195.9 197.7 195.3 198.2 208.0 219.6 235.5
Exports of goods & services 223.1 240.0 247.5 204.9 266.0 292.0 318.9 343.3 366.8 390.5
Imports of goods & services 255.0 244.5 228.2 233.6 282.6 295.8 306.2 321.1 340.7 369.4
Stockbuilding 7.2 -0.6 -6.3 33.0 -3.6 -3.4 -3.1 -2.9 -2.7 -2.6
Domestic demand 887.7 780.7 739.9 744.7 708.4 703.7 721.2 767.0 820.4 890.5
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 58.6 56.2 56.8 56.8 58.3 57.1 55.9 55.9 56.5 57.7
Government consumption 14.4 14.7 15.5 15.2 16.1 16.0 15.8 15.3 14.8 14.4
Gross fixed investment 29.9 29.8 25.9 27.4 28.6 27.9 27.0 26.4 25.9 25.8
Stockbuilding 0.8 -0.1 -0.8 4.6 -0.5 -0.5 -0.4 -0.4 -0.3 -0.3
Exports of goods & services 26.1 30.9 32.6 28.6 38.4 41.7 43.4 43.5 43.3 42.8
Imports of goods & services 29.8 31.5 30.1 32.6 40.9 42.3 41.7 40.7 40.2 40.5
Memorandum item
National savings ratio (%) 30.7 29.7 25.1 32.0 b 28.0 27.4 26.6 26.0 25.6 25.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Real expenditure on GDP (TL bn at constant 2009 prices)
GDP 1,703.2 1,757.8 1,769.8 1,799.4 1,943.2 2,007.3 2,073.0 2,141.8 2,216.4 2,294.5
Private consumption 1,019.0 1,027.2 1,040.7 1,072.9 1,140.6 1,161.5 1,180.3 1,208.8 1,249.8 1,304.7
Government consumption 230.1 245.3 255.7 260.9 269.8 276.8 285.1 294.5 302.8 311.3
Gross fixed investment 502.9 503.7 439.1 469.0 499.5 518.5 538.2 558.1 577.1 596.7
Exports of goods & services 395.8 429.4 449.9 384.3 454.3 488.0 521.3 546.8 569.1 587.0
Imports of goods & services 413.1 391.2 365.2 394.4 427.6 444.1 458.6 474.4 490.8 513.7
Stockbuilding -31.57 -56.57 -50.32 6.62 6.62 6.62 6.62 8.00 8.50 8.50
Domestic demand 1,720.5 1,719.6 1,685.1 1,809.4 1,916.5 1,963.4 2,010.3 2,069.4 2,138.1 2,221.2
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 7.4 3.2 0.7 1.7 8.0 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.5
Private consumption 5.9 0.8 1.3 3.1 6.3 1.8 1.6 2.4 3.4 4.4
Government consumption 5.2 6.6 4.2 2.1 3.4 2.6 3.0 3.3 2.8 2.8
Gross fixed investment 8.1 0.2 -12.8 6.8 6.5 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.4 3.4
Exports of goods & services 12.4 8.5 4.8 -14.6 18.2 7.4 6.8 4.9 4.1 3.1
Imports of goods & services 10.3 -5.3 -6.7 8.0 8.4 3.8 3.3 3.4 3.5 4.6
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.4 -1.5 0.4 3.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 7.0 -0.1 -2.0 7.4 5.9 2.4 2.4 2.9 3.3 3.9
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 3.6 0.5 0.8 1.8 3.8 1.1 0.9 1.4 1.9 2.5
Government consumption 0.7 0.9 0.6 0.3 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4
Gross fixed investment 2.4 0.0 -3.7 1.7 1.7 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.9
External balance 0.3 3.3 2.7 -5.4 2.0 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.3 -0.2
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Origin of GDP (TL bn at constant 2009 prices)
GDP at factor cost 1509.5 1,559.6 1,574.6 1,587.9 b 1,691.0 1,746.8 1,803.9 1,863.8 1,928.7 1,996.7
Agriculture 106.3 108.5 112.1 118.7 124.0 127.1 130.3 133.6 136.9 140.3
Industry 470.1 472.6 458.7 463.1 482.5 504.3 527.0 550.7 575.4 601.3
Services 933.1 978.5 1,003.8 1,006.1 1,084.4 1,115.3 1,146.7 1,179.6 1,216.3 1,255.0
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 4.9 2.1 3.3 5.9 4.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Industry 9.3 0.5 -2.9 1.0 4.2 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5
Services 7.6 4.9 2.6 0.2 7.8 2.9 2.8 2.9 3.1 3.2
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 6.8 6.4 7.0 7.3 7.1 7.0 7.0 6.9 6.8 6.8
Industry 32.8 32.9 30.3 30.5 29.4 29.7 30.1 30.4 30.7 31.0
Services 60.4 60.7 62.6 62.2 63.5 63.2 62.9 62.6 62.4 62.2
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) 8.7 1.7 -0.6 1.6 20.8 7.3 2.0 2.5 2.3 2.0
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 3.8 1.0 3.0 6.8 5.2 0.8 0.8 1.0 1.3 1.3
Total factor productivity growth 1.9 0.5 2.1 3.3 4.8 0.2 1.2 1.4 1.7 1.7
Growth of capital stock 7.0 6.5 4.1 4.4 4.2 4.1 4.1 4.1 4.0 3.9
Growth of potential GDP 6.7 4.2 4.2 1.3 6.5 2.1 4.1 4.2 4.4 3.4
Growth of real GDP 7.4 c 3.2 c 0.7 c 1.7 c 8.0 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.5
Growth of real GDP per head 5.7 c 1.7 c -0.6 c 0.6 c 7.1 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.0
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 81.1 82.3 83.4 84.3 85.0 85.6 86.0 86.3 86.7 87.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 855.9 776.2 759.2 716.1 691.8 699.9 734.0 789.2 846.6 911.5
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 10,550 9,430 9,100 8,490 8,130 8,180 8,540 9,140 9,760 10,460
Private consumption (US$ bn) 501.8 436.4 431.6 406.7 403.2 399.5 410.3 441.1 478.1 526.4
Private consumption per head (US$) 6,190 5,300 5,170 4,820 4,740 4,670 4,770 5,110 5,510 6,040
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2310.8 2441.9 2502.6 2575.0 b 2830.8 2991.4 3166.6 3340.5 3525.9 3734.1
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 28,490 29,660 30,000 30,530 b 33,290 34,960 36,840 38,700 40,660 42,850
Personal disposable income (TL bn) 1,917.5 b 2,206.9 b 2,564.7 b 2,998.0 b 3,514.6 4,041.8 4,648.0 5,405.7 6,281.4 7,299.0
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 525.6 b 457.1 b 452.0 b 427.8 b 424.1 422.1 435.4 470.1 511.7 565.8
Growth of real disposable income (%) 5.9 b 0.8 b 1.3 b 3.5 b 6.3 2.3 2.1 2.9 3.8 4.8
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 1.08 1.08 1.09 1.09 1.10 a 1.10 b 1.09 1.10 1.10 1.11
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 1.07 0.91 0.88 0.86 0.75 0.72 0.72 0.73 0.74 0.76
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 1.92 1.92 1.88 1.97 b 2.02 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.01 2.06
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.98 0.94 0.99 0.99 1.04 1.05 1.07 1.06 1.05 1.02
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 21.7 22.2 23.2 24.0 21.7 21.2 21.2 18.8 18.7 18.2
Interest 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.7 3.1 3.4 4.0 3.5 3.1 3.3
Non-interest 19.9 20.2 20.9 21.3 18.6 17.8 17.2 15.4 15.7 14.9
Government revenue 20.2 20.2 20.3 20.5 18.5 17.9 18.2 15.9 16.0 15.5
Budget balance -1.5 -1.9 -2.9 -3.4 -3.2 -3.3 -3.0 -3.0 -2.8 -2.7
Primary balance 0.3 0.0 -0.6 -0.8 -0.1 0.1 1.0 0.5 0.3 0.6
Government debt 28.1 30.3 32.7 40.0 39.5 38.4 36.9 35.8 34.8 34.2
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate TL:US$ (av) 3.65 4.83 5.67 7.01 8.29 9.58 10.68 11.50 12.28 12.90
Exchange rate TL:US$ (year-end) 3.78 5.27 5.95 7.35 9.03 10.10 11.15 11.90 12.55 13.20
Exchange rate TL:€ (av) 4.12 5.70 6.35 8.00 9.90 11.20 12.25 13.51 14.91 16.00
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 73.9 b 63.3 b 61.7 b 55.3 50.2 49.1 48.7 47.9 46.8 46.2
Purchasing power parity TL:US$ (av) 1.35 1.53 1.72 1.95 2.03 2.24 2.47 2.72 2.95 3.15
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 15.7 19.1 26.1 36.0 17.6 22.1 19.3 15.6 15.4 13.3
Domestic credit growth (%) 19.0 18.1 16.1 39.0 11.7 20.1 21.0 17.0 14.8 13.8
Lending rate (av; %) 15.8 23.7 20.4 12.9 20.3 16.8 14.1 13.5 13.0 12.5
Deposit rate (av; %) 12.4 18.1 18.8 10.8 18.1 16.0 14.3 13.0 13.0 12.0
3-month interbank money market interest rate (av; %) 12.8 19.8 20.7 11.2 19.8 18.0 14.4 11.5 8.7 7.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 31.5 32.2 32.5 30.7 30.8 31.0 31.7 32.4 33.1 33.3
Labour force (% change) 3.5 2.2 0.9 -5.5 0.4 0.6 2.3 2.2 2.1 0.4
Employment (m) 28.1 28.7 28.0 26.7 27.4 28.1 28.8 29.4 30.1 30.7
Employment (% change) 3.5 2.2 -2.3 -4.8 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.3 2.2 2.2
Unemployment (m) 3.4 3.5 4.5 4.0 3.4 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.5
Unemployment rate (%) 10.9 10.9 13.8 13.2 13.0 12.3 11.8 11.2 10.7 10.0
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
Consumer prices (av) 11.1 16.3 15.2 12.3 17.1 14.1 12.1 9.3 8.2 7.4
Consumer prices (year-end) 11.7 20.1 11.8 14.6 17.0 13.1 10.6 8.8 7.8 7.3
Producer prices (av) 15.8 27.0 17.6 12.2 37.9 28.3 20.2 15.9 9.5 7.4
GDP deflator (av) 10.9 16.3 14.2 14.6 b 5.8 13.2 13.2 12.1 10.6 9.3
Private consumption deflator (av) 11.1 14.2 14.7 12.9 10.3 12.4 12.7 13.1 11.9 10.8
Government consumption deflator (av) 10.7 14.8 16.6 12.2 16.6 13.6 11.6 8.9 7.8 6.9
Fixed investment deflator (av) 13.1 19.4 14.9 15.0 12.0 10.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0
Average nominal wages 13.2 b 14.6 b 21.0 b 14.0 b 14.8 14.0 13.0 13.0 13.0 13.0
Average real wages 1.9 b -1.5 b 5.0 b 1.5 b -2.0 -0.1 0.8 3.4 4.4 5.2
Unit labour costs (TL-based; av) d 11.6 b 16.0 b 20.0 b 9.2 b 11.6 15.6 14.7 14.4 14.1 14.1
Unit labour costs (US$-based) d -7.6 b -12.4 b 2.1 b -11.6 b -5.6 0.1 2.8 6.2 6.9 8.5
Labour costs per hour (TL) d 17.9 b 20.5 b 24.8 b 28.2 b 32.4 36.9 41.7 47.2 53.3 60.2
Labour costs per hour (US$) 4.9 b 4.2 b 4.4 b 4.0 b 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.7
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts. d Manufacturing only: public and private sectors.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -40.8 -21.7 6.8 -37.3 -21.0 -20.0 -16.7 -9.6 -7.0 -8.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.8 -2.8 0.9 -5.2 -3.0 -2.9 -2.3 -1.2 -0.8 -0.9
Goods: exports fob 169.2 178.9 182.2 168.4 219.5 234.2 250.4 259.9 270.1 276.9
Goods: imports fob -227.8 -219.6 -199.0 -206.3 -243.6 -254.7 -264.2 -266.5 -273.4 -283.7
Trade balance -58.6 -40.7 -16.8 -37.9 -24.1 -20.4 -13.7 -6.5 -3.3 -6.9
Services: credit 53.5 58.6 63.6 34.9 40.0 42.0 42.3 46.1 49.0 54.5
Services: debit -27.1 -28.5 -28.1 -25.7 -28.9 -31.1 -33.8 -36.8 -39.3 -41.5
Services balance 26.3 30.2 35.5 9.2 11.2 10.9 8.5 9.3 9.7 12.9
Primary income: credit 5.0 6.1 6.3 6.8 7.5 3.6 4.4 3.7 4.2 4.5
Primary income: debit -16.1 -18.1 -19.2 -15.5 -15.6 -14.1 -15.8 -16.0 -17.3 -18.3
Primary income balance -11.1 -11.9 -12.8 -8.7 -8.1 -10.6 -11.4 -12.3 -13.2 -13.8
Secondary income: credit 4.5 2.8 2.7 4.2 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.4 4.5 4.8
Secondary income: debit -2.0 -2.0 -1.9 -4.0 -3.9 -4.0 -4.1 -4.5 -4.8 -5.1
Secondary income balance 2.5 0.8 0.8 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.4
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 91.8 94.3 90.3 89.0 b 102.8 106.9 109.9 113.2 116.8 121.0
Export prices (% change) 1.8 2.8 -4.3 -1.4 b 15.5 4.0 2.7 3.1 3.1 3.6
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 87.8 93.7 89.9 84.3 b 95.8 96.9 97.0 98.3 101.0 105.0
Import prices (% change) 7.4 6.7 -4.1 -6.2 b 13.7 1.1 0.1 1.3 2.7 3.9
Terms of trade (2010=100) 104.5 100.7 100.4 105.6 b 107.3 110.4 113.2 115.2 115.6 115.3
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 7.7 b 2.4 b -0.9 b -8.6 b 8.1 7.1 4.7 4.0 4.2 4.2
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ m)
Inward direct investment 11,042 12,822 9,266 7,824 7,000 8,000 9,356 11,067 12,035 12,987
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 1.3 1.7 1.2 1.1 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 4.3 5.6 4.7 4.0 3.5 4.1 4.7 5.3 5.5 5.5
Outward direct investment -2,703 -3,587 -2,943 -3,240 -3,000 -3,200 -2,890 -3,000 -3,145 -3,096
Net foreign direct investment 8,339 9,235 6,323 4,584 4,000 4,800 6,466 8,067 8,890 9,891
Stock of foreign direct investment 180,258 193,080 202,346 210,170 217,170 225,170 234,526 245,593 257,628 270,615
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 2,222 2,345 2,425 2,492 2,554 2,632 2,728 2,845 2,971 3,105
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 21.1 24.9 26.7 29.4 31.4 32.2 32.0 31.1 30.4 29.7
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.51 2.75 0.87 0.75 0.61 0.66 0.74 0.85 0.88 0.92
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.60 0.60 0.59 0.63 0.59 0.58 0.58 0.58 0.59 0.59
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 456.6 446.0 440.8 448.2 443.1 458.2 474.1 478.9 486.4 492.4
Total external debt (% of GDP) 53.3 57.5 58.1 62.6 64.1 65.5 64.6 60.7 57.4 54.0
Debt/exports ratio (%) 152.6 144.2 132.5 168.2 124.4 124.5 121.3 118.0 114.3 110.8
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 37.9 34.4 34.3 36.6 31.6 26.2 25.8 26.8 25.4 25.2
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is EIU
Global data Global data
OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
Domestic data GDP growth and components: TurkStat
Population: UN Population database and EIU interpolation
Consumer prices: IMF, IFS; TurkStat
Industrial production: derived from OECD, Main Economic Indicators
Exchange rates and interest rates: IMF, IFS
External trade and balance of payments: IMF, IFS; Central Bank of Turkey; TurkStat
Central government financial balance: IMF, IFS; Turkish Treasury
Foreign direct investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report; Central Bank of Turkey
Abbreviations IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
TurkStat: Turkish Statistical Institute
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development

Subject: Tax rates; Privatization; Macroeconomics; Foreign exchange rates; Coups d'etat; Politics; International relations; Research & development expenditures; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Patronage; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Central banks; Economic growth; COVID-19; Foreign policy; Tax evasion; Economic forecasts; Interest rates

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Privatization Macroeconomics Foreign exchange rates International relations Research & development expenditures International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Central banks Economic growth Tax evasion Economic forecasts Interest rates; Industry: 52111 :‎ Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Location: Turkey; Middle East

People: Erdogan, Recep Tayyip

Company / organization: Name: Justice & Development Party-Turkey; NAICS: 813940

Classification: 52111: Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Identifier / keyword: Turkey; Middle East

Title: Country Forecast Turkey October 2021 Updater

Publication title: Country Forecast. Turkey; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Oct 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09668632

e-ISSN: 20489730

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611016725

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-turkey-october-2021-updater/docview/2611016725/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Venezuela October 2021 Updater

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-october-2021-updater/docview/2611014439/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Real GDP growth (%) 4.5 13.0 5.2 3.2 2.5 2.0 Consumer price inflation (av; %) 1,689 807.7 344.6 205.7 105.3 90.1 Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.2 -6.6 -6.5 -7.5 -7.8 -7.8 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.5 1.5 1.9 2.0 1.4 1.1 Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 10.1 6.4 8.0 14.3 16.3 17.2 Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (av) 3,979,009 33,074,109 142,896,126 441,713,118 922,092,143 1,771,945,546 Exchange rate BsS:€1 (av) 4,751,266 38,696,707 163,973,305 519,012,913 1,120,341,954 2,197,212,477 Country forecast overview: Venezuela ranks 82nd of 82 countries in the global business environment rankings for 2022-26, retaining its bottom spot from the 2017-21 historical period, despite minor improvements in some areas. Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 29.7 Population growth -0.4 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 50.4 Real GDP growth -24.6 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 122.3 Real domestic demand growth -25.2 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,696 Inflation 7,490.5 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,113 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.6 Exchange rate (av) BsS:US$ 320,729.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.0 a EIU estimates. In January 2016 the politicised Supreme Court declared the legislature to be in contempt of court, blocking all subsequent legislation.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Venezuela+October+2021+Updater&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-10-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=09669574&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - Despite Venezuela's socioeconomic collapse and the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, EIU expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela, to retain power throughout the 2022-26 forecast period. Mr Maduro's position will be supported primarily by his grip over a complex security apparatus and the opposition's lack of de facto power. On this basis, we expect continued deterioration of the economy, sustained outward migration, and a poorer and more violent Venezuela. Despite US sanctions (and their impact on oil production), the Maduro regime has managed internal dissent through a patronage system that rewards loyalty and through its strict control over the security forces.
- The scale of the socioeconomic collapse and the elevated level of political instability will ensure that the Maduro regime continues to be challenged both economically and politically. In particular, there is a non-negligible risk of regime change stemming from a possible breakdown in the patronage system that sustains the security forces' support of the regime. Under our baseline forecast, we assume that Mr Maduro will avoid this, as long as oil rents recover from 2021 onwards. However, there are some risks to this assumption stemming from the impact of US sanctions and weak of incentives for investment in the domestic oil industry.
- De facto dollarisation of the economy is expanding. Concurrently, the government has taken measures that have allowed the official exchange rate to float. These measures have aided price stability and therefore increased the availability of some basic goods. However, the measures are not a product of economic orthodoxy, but rather of policy decisions to ensure the regime's survival. We do not expect to see the comprehensive economic and institutional reforms that would be required to resolve Venezuela's economic crisis within the forecast period.

Country forecast overview: Key indicators Key indicators 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real GDP growth (%) 4.5 13.0 5.2 3.2 2.5 2.0
Consumer price inflation (av; %) 1,689 807.7 344.6 205.7 105.3 90.1
Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.2 -6.6 -6.5 -7.5 -7.8 -7.8
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 0.5 1.5 1.9 2.0 1.4 1.1
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 10.1 6.4 8.0 14.3 16.3 17.2
Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (av) 3,979,009 33,074,109 142,896,126 441,713,118 922,092,143 1,771,945,546
Exchange rate BsS:€1 (av) 4,751,266 38,696,707 163,973,305 519,012,913 1,120,341,954 2,197,212,477
Country forecast overview: Business environment rankings                
Value of index a     Global rank b     Regional rank c  
2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26   2017-21 2022-26
2.95 3.19   82 82   12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

- Venezuela ranks 82nd of 82 countries in the global business environment rankings for 2022-26, retaining its bottom spot from the 2017-21 historical period, despite minor improvements in some areas. Reforms to institutions, economic policy and the business environment are unlikely.

Country forecast overview: Venezuela's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2022-23: Enforcement of price controls remains lax, but risk of state intervention remains high. Corruption and selective application of regulations are common and continue to undermine free competition.
2024-26: Contract rights remain weak, and red tape and ad hoc interventionism continue.
Policy towards foreign investment 2022-23: Government efforts to revive foreign investment fail owing to US sanctions and political and economic instability.
2024-26: Investment flows remain low amid ongoing economic volatility. Intellectual property protection and private property rights deteriorate.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2022-23: Currency controls are weakened, but access to foreign currency remains limited. US sanctions hamper trade.
2024-26: Efforts to remove trade and capital controls are undertaken on a gradual basis, and de facto dollarisation advances. Domestic supply of foreign currency remains limited as oil prices decline.
Taxes 2022-23: Government explores options to broaden the tax base. However, its efforts are impeded by extremely high levels of informality.
2024-26: Tax system remains complex and unwieldy, but risk of discriminatory, ad hoc tax measures declines.
Financing 2022-23: Inflation remains high, and concerns surrounding economic instability restrict financing to only short term.
2024-26: Economic adjustments take time to feed through to solid, sustainable growth in credit to private sector and development of capital markets. Long-term finance remains in short supply.
Labour market 2022-23: Labour laws add substantially to non-wage costs. Firms prohibited from firing workers until end-2022. Ongoing emigration of skilled labour aggravates skills shortages.
2024-26: Labour market rigidities persist despite some increased flexibility in hiring and firing practices.
Infrastructure 2022-23: Underinvestment in water network and electricity grid leads to continued rationing and unpredictable blackouts.
2024-26: Investors remain highly cautious about committing to long-term capital projects. Infrastructure deteriorates even further.
Technological readiness 2022-23: E-government services remain almost non-existent. Telecommunications sector is opened to foreign investment, but with little interest. Local use of cryptocurrency expands among middle- and high-income households.
2024-26: Limited regulatory capacity and years of underinvestment continue to restrict internet and mobile coverage.
Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 29.7 Population growth -0.4
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 50.4 Real GDP growth -24.6
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 122.3 Real domestic demand growth -25.2
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,696 Inflation 7,490.5
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,113 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.6
Exchange rate (av) BsS:US$ 320,729.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.0
a EIU estimates.
Background: From 1958 until the mid-1990s, two parties-Acción Democrática and the Comité de Organización Política Electoral Independiente-alternated in power. Frequent economic crises and endemic corruption eventually led to a collapse in support for both parties and culminated in the 1998 election of Hugo Chávez, a former lieutenant-colonel and leader of a failed coup in 1992. Mr Chávez's policy programme exacerbated political polarisation, but several attempts to remove him from power before his death in March 2013 proved unsuccessful. His chosen successor, Nicolás Maduro, has seen his own popularity plummet, as his macroeconomic mismanagement-aggravated by wide-ranging US sanctions-has plunged the country into a state of economic collapse.
Political structure: Although Venezuela is nominally a federal republic with separation of powers, the ruling Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV) has systematically eroded institutions. In December 2015 the opposition coalition, Mesa de la Unidad Democrática, won control of the unicameral National Assembly. In January 2016 the politicised Supreme Court declared the legislature to be in contempt of court, blocking all subsequent legislation. In August 2017 a PSUV-only Constituent Assembly (ANC) granted itself control over all legislative matters, becoming the country's de facto legislature and sidelining the National Assembly. The ANC was dissolved at end-2020, after the PSUV and its allies regained control of the legislature in an election that was widely regarded as rigged.
Policy issues: The most pressing policy issue is the need to stabilise the crisis-ridden economy. The monetisation of vast public deficits has created an ever-increasing excess of domestic currency, triggering hyperinflation. Mismanagement of PDVSA (the state-owned oil company and originator of practically all foreign-currency inflows into the country) has resulted in a sharp contraction in oil production. Attempts to address these problems through distortionary price and currency controls proved actively counter-productive and led to major shortages of both foreign currency and basic goods. The scarcity of foreign exchange also led to arrears on most of the external debt issued by the sovereign and state-owned firms. The Maduro regime is now changing tack and pursuing incremental pro-market reforms, but its efforts are hindered by chronic economic instability, a lack of confidence in the legal framework and wide-ranging US sanctions.
Taxation: The top corporate tax rate is 34% for non-oil companies and 50% for oil firms. The value-added tax (VAT) rate stands at 12%.
Foreign trade: EIU estimates that the goods trade surplus fell to US$12.6bn in 2019, amid a long-term decline in oil exports. We estimate that the trade account deteriorated further in 2020, shifting to a US$1.7bn deficit.

Major exports 2018 % of total Major imports 2013 % of total
Petroleum 88.7 Intermediate goods 56.5
Other 11.3 Capital goods 24.2
    Consumer goods 19.3
       
Leading markets 2019 % of total Leading suppliers 2019 % of total
India 27.0 China 30.6
UAE 11.1 US 18.3
Malaysia 2.6 Brazil 7.7
Aruba 1.9 India 6.3
Outlook for 2022-26: Political stability EIU expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV, the Chavistas), to remain in power throughout the 2022-26 forecast period, despite its role in fomenting the country's ongoing socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis. A number of factors underpin our forecast; particularly significant is the regime's strict control over the military, the police and paramilitary forces. This control, which depends on a patronage structure that rewards high-ranking officials and a disciplinary system that severely punishes insubordination, will allow the regime to manage internal dissent.
Having consolidated power over the years, the Chavistas have unchecked authority over all branches of government. Political control is nominally disputed by Juan Guaidó, the leader of the Plataforma Unitaria (PU) opposition alliance and self-declared interim president, but the opposition lacks de facto power. Mr Guaidó retains the backing of most Western powers, including the US, which he has used to co-ordinate a "maximum pressure" campaign (involving wide-ranging economic sanctions) against the Maduro regime. However, with these hardline tactics failing to deliver results-and in some cases proving counterproductive-domestic support for Mr Guaidó has waned.
It is against this backdrop that the Maduro regime and the opposition have entered into new talks aimed at overcoming the long-running political détente. The president's main goals during the negotiations are to obtain international recognition and secure sanctions relief. However, Mr Maduro will not acquiesce to any measure that would threaten his immediate grip on power, especially as he has shown himself capable of surviving near-complete diplomatic and economic isolation. The opposition could potentially extract some meaningful (albeit minor) concessions from the regime in exchange for partial sanctions relief, but the balance of risks is tilted towards a continued stalemate. The asymmetry in incentives and bargaining power, as well as the deep mistrust between the two sides, means that the talks could fall apart relatively quickly.
There are risks to our assumption that Mr Maduro will remain in power over the medium term. For instance, we do not rule out the possibility of a negotiated transition if substantial progress is made in the ongoing political dialogue. An agreement on the reimposition of presidential term limits could potentially create a political opening in 2024, when Mr Maduro's term ends. Another possibility is that Mr Maduro is deposed through an internal coup, which could materialise in the event of an unexpected breakdown in the regime's patronage system (which is heavily reliant on revenue from PDVSA, the state-owned oil firm). At present, neither scenario is particularly likely.
In this context, the major political challenges facing the regime will be those of its own making, rather than those posed by the political opposition. As institutional corruption grew, the regime forged pacts with various armed groups, either out of political convenience or to tap new, illicit revenue streams. However, several of these agreements have now broken down, leading to violent turf wars across Venezuela. Although these criminal groups lack the resources to challenge the regime outright, they will undermine the enforcement of law and order in the country.
Outlook for 2022-26: Election watch Following a legislative election in December 2020 that was widely regarded as neither free nor fair, regional and local elections (to elect governors, mayors and their legislative counterparts) are next on the electoral calendar; they will take place on November 21st. The Maduro regime has taken several steps to give more legitimacy to the upcoming polls, including appointing two opposition representatives to the five-member board of the electoral council (CNE), renewing voter rolls and inviting international observers-such as the EU and the UN-to oversee the elections.
Although the playing field remains heavily tilted in favour of the PSUV, these electoral concessions have paved the way for greater opposition participation in November. However, in our view, even with semi-competitive elections, the PU will struggle to make inroads into regional and local governments. This is partly due to continued divisions within the eclectic opposition coalition, but it also reflects a significant disconnect between the PU leadership and the Venezuelan public-a problem exacerbated by years of electoral boycotts by the opposition. Against this backdrop, we consider the PSUV's dominance at the sub-national level to be fairly safe.
Outlook for 2022-26: International relations The regime's main foreign policy challenge will be to facilitate a rapprochement with the US that is compatible with its own survival. Following a conflict-ridden relationship with the previous US government, Mr Maduro will try to reset ties with that country under the current president, Joe Biden, but we expect little progress to be made. US policy towards Venezuela has bipartisan support in the US, and Mr Biden is unlikely to provide significant sanctions relief unless the Maduro regime makes major political compromises and commits to democratic reform (both of which are highly improbable). Any changes to US sanctions policy will therefore be only on humanitarian grounds and aimed at improving the lives of the poorest Venezuelans, as shown by recent exemptions granted for pandemic-related transactions and imports of liquefied petroleum gas.
Venezuela's ties with its allies will be defined by ideological and geopolitical alignment, rather than mutual economic benefit. Russia and China have previously extended major financial support, but this has been scaled back in recent years, as Venezuela has been haphazard in making its repayments. Instead, Venezuela will increase its reliance on Iran, which has recently become a major backer of the regime. However, Iranian assistance will be limited to intermittent fuel shipments (to alleviate Venezuela's petrol shortages) and technical assistance (to help PDVSA to repair its refinery complexes).
Outlook for 2022-26: Policy trends The Maduro regime will find it difficult to put the economy back on a more sustainable footing, and it is currently veering from crisis to crisis. In the immediate term, the government's policy priorities will be to contain the public health calamity caused by the Covid-19 pandemic and to alleviate ongoing diesel shortages. However, progress on both of these goals will be limited.
To combat Covid-19, the government is maintaining its "Fórmula 7+7 Plus" strategy, which involves alternating between a week of tighter restrictions and a week of more relaxed ones. However, this will not prevent fresh waves of the virus, increasing pressure on Venezuela's decrepit medical infrastructure. Meanwhile, the country's vaccine rollout has faced major implementation challenges; as at September 21st only 18% of the population had been fully vaccinated. We do not expect enough vaccine doses to be distributed to have a significant impact on local transmission until 2023.
In an effort to address severe diesel shortages, which hamper the functioning of domestic supply chains, the government has sought to increase Venezuela's output by restarting operations at important refineries. However, that fix is not a viable long-term solution, mainly because producing diesel requires light crude, which is in limited supply and cannot be easily produced locally. The government has sought to import diesel intermittently through intermediaries, but it lacks the hard currency to increase its imports on the scale required. We therefore consider it likely that a long-term remedy will hinge on the Biden administration reinstating exemptions on crude-for-diesel swaps. We expect that to happen later this year or early in 2022, but risks to this assumption are high.
Regarding the broader policy goal of promoting economic recovery, our own forecasts suggest that GDP will finally stop falling in the forecast period as oil production stabilises and then ticks up slightly. However, we do not believe that the government will be willing or able to undertake the deep reforms needed to secure a stable and sustained recovery. The businesses that have survived years of capital destruction, brain drain, hyperinflation and suffocating govern-ment regulations have done so by adapting their models to the changing circumstances. More often than not, this has involved a downsizing of personnel, increased informality and reduced profitability.
With the public sector completely overstretched, the government is betting on the private sector to drive the recovery. To that end, it has passed an anti-blockade law, which gives the executive branch the unchecked authority to sign new deals with private firms and countries confidentially (in order to skirt international sanctions), without going through public tender processes. Concurrently, the regime is working on a hydrocarbons reform that would incentivise increased private-sector participation in the oil industry. However, these efforts are unlikely to yield significant results; even assuming that the regime manages to sidestep financial sanctions, it will struggle to attract new investment, given the abysmal business environment and lack of confidence in the rule of law.
Outlook for 2022-26: Fiscal policy The authorities have not published complete data on the fiscal accounts since 2011. However, we expect that a high level of inefficient current expenditure, combined with an extremely weak revenue intake, will keep the budget deficit wide and the public debt/GDP ratio above 300% throughout the forecast period. The sovereign's default on most of its interest and principal repayments will continue to prevent access to external finance, leaving the regime reliant on monetisation to fund its deficits. Even if the government reaches an agreement with some of its creditors (including China) to restructure debt liabilities in 2022-26, we still expect the public debt burden to remain huge, particularly as considerable off-balance-sheet debt financing-mainly PDVSA-issued debt and development funds-understate the true size of total public liabilities.
Outlook for 2022-26: Monetary policy Monetary policy will remain subservient to fiscal policy as the Banco Central de Venezuela (BCV, the central bank) continues to print money to meet the public sector's financing needs. However, in recent years the BCV has taken steps to control growth of monetary aggregates. For instance, it lifted the cash reserve ratio (CRR) from 21.5% in late 2018 to 93% in early 2020, although it has relaxed the CRR slightly since then, to 85% currently. These measures have failed to tame inflation and have also led to the complete destruction of private-sector credit, which stands at less than 1% of levels recorded four years ago. These factors have accelerated the trend towards wider use of the US dollar in the economy; about two-thirds of financial transactions now take place in dollars.
Outlook for 2022-26: Economic growth Following a steep depression in 2013-20 (when real GDP contracted by a cumulative 77%), Venezuela is poised for a mild economic upswing in 2021-26. However, this upturn will still leave GDP well below its historical peaks.
Venezuela's economic growth is strongly correlated with oil production and exports, prospects for which have improved slightly. Having plummeted to 500,000 barrels/day in 2020-the lowest level in several decades-we estimate that oil output has increased modestly, to about 530,000 b/d in 2021. There are only 25 active oil rigs in the country-virtually unchanged from last year and substantially below a peak of 95 in early 2012. Moreover, there are few incentives to bring new rigs online in the near term. At present Venezuela's average (after tax) break-even price is about US$49/barrel. However, US sanctions on the regime raise the risks involved in dealing with Venezuela, forcing the country to offer a hefty discount on its crude. Therefore, at current market prices (Venezuela's oil basket traded at US$51.8/b in August), there is only a modest profit to be made from new investment.
We expect real GDP growth to accelerate to 13% in 2022, assuming that oil prices remain supportive and that producers continue to adapt to post-sanctions export markets. Although this appears to be a sharp rebound, it largely reflects a low base of comparison and does not indicate a substantive recovery in the real economy. For instance, we forecast oil output at just 590,000 b/d in 2022, sharply below its pre-depression level of 2.5m b/d in 2012.
In the medium term, we expect the recovery to stagnate. Serious operational problems, a limited pool of buyers of Venezuelan crude and the weak long-term fundamentals of the oil market will cause growth to taper off towards the end of our forecast period. The non-oil economy will make some modest gains, assuming that continued dollarisation engenders relative macroeconomic stability. However, weak fundamentals and a poor policy environment will keep market opportunities subdued. Consequently, we expect real GDP to remain below pre-pandemic levels even in 2026.
Outlook for 2022-26: Inflation A severely reduced domestic goods supply, constraints on import capacity and the monetisation of large public deficits will impede the disinflationary process throughout 2021-26. The regime has shown little inclination to take on the structural reforms that would address the root causes of inflation. Despite this, an ongoing process of informal dollarisation will mean that the bolívar increasingly loses its relevance in price setting, helping to ease inflationary pressures over time. In fact, we expect Venezuela to exit hyperinflation in 2023 (with monthly inflation falling below 50% for 12 consecutive months). Nevertheless, the extent of dollarisation in the economy will eventually plateau: we expect the public sector to continue its use of the bolívar, given the government's reliance on seigniorage revenue. Consequently, inflation will remain chronically high, even in the latter half of our forecast period.
Outlook for 2022-26: Exchange rates Venezuela is poised for its third currency redenomination since 2008. From October 1st the BCV will replace the bolívar soberano with the bolívar digital. The change will effectively take six zeros off the currency, as each bolívar digital will be worth 1m bolívar soberanos. Although the measure is ostensibly part of the BCV's pivot to digitisation, the authorities have confirmed that they will continue to issue fiat money. In our view, the redenomination is largely cosmetic; although it will help to simplify book-keeping for a while, it will not fundamentally engender confidence in the bolívar, especially in the context of sustained debt monetisation. Consequently, local adoption of the US dollar will continue apace.
In real, trade-weighted terms, the bolívar is hugely overvalued relative to its historical average. This is a result of currency undershooting: during episodes of hyperinflation, prices tend to respond more rapidly than exchange rates to monetary expansion. The resulting real currency appreciation has wide-ranging implications for the economy. For consumers who are increasingly transacting in US dollars, it means that the cost of living is extremely high. Indeed, going by The Economist's Big Mac index (a currency comparison tool), Venezuela is one of the most expensive countries in the world in purchasing power parity terms. For businesses, meanwhile, currency overvaluation means that goods produced locally are simply not competitive by international standards. Assuming that inflation edges down somewhat over time, the weak fundamentals of the bolívar should produce renewed real depreciation in the medium term. Although there is considerable uncertainty around the future of the bolívar-bearing in mind the authorities' inability to tackle inflation or real currency appreciation for several years now-our basic assumption is that unwinding years of currency overvaluation will be a slow process.
Outlook for 2022-26: External sector Balance-of-payments pressures will remain severe in 2022-26, contributing to goods shortages and economic inequities. Foreign reserves stagnated at US$6.2bn in July-their lowest level in three decades. This steep decline reflects poor policymaking and a lack of economic diversification in the country's external sector.
Under our baseline forecast, we expect reserves to rise modestly over the forecast period, averaging US$7.8bn in 2022-26. This increase will be driven largely by trends on the current account, as Venezuela's access to foreign capital will remain extremely limited. We expect the current-account surplus to widen from an estimated 0.5% of GDP in 2021 to an average of 1.6% of GDP in 2022-26. Crucially, our forecasts assume that export earnings will recover from a nadir in 2020. We also expect workers' remittances from abroad to play a significant role in propping up the current-account balance.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
International assumptions
World GDP growth (%) 3.1 2.9 2.3 -3.7 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.5
US GDP growth (%) 2.3 2.9 2.3 -3.4 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.1 1.8
Latin America growth (%) 0.9 0.8 -0.5 -7.0 6.5 2.8 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.3
World trade growth (%) 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 9.0 5.6 4.8 4.2 4.1 3.8
US CPI (%) 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0 2.3
EU27 CPI (%) 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.1 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8 2.0
Industrial raw materials export price (%) 20.2 2.2 -8.6 -3.2 37.2 0.3 0.2 -12.2 0.8 1.1
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5 53.5
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (%) 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6 1.8
US$:€ (av) 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22 1.24
¥:€ (av) 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 130.1 129.8 128.6 132.8 135.9 136.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Expenditure on GDP (BsS bn at current market prices)
GDP 2.01 9,823 808,6670 16,178,125 294,446,656 3,026,280,936 13,860,924,242 43,067,028,986 90,365,030,041 174,093,649,867
Private consumption 2.02 7,239 366,314 10,494,884 193,420,717 1,983,852,745 9,249,723,524 29,328,576,865 61,883,297,184 120,177,363,132
Government consumption 0.18 1,652 211,103 6,216,893 114,228,081 1,155,520,354 5,336,289,581 16,370,109,753 33,467,973,549 63,101,495,281
Gross fixed investment 0.33 1,586 88,386 1,775,775 34,463,562 417,608,593 2,172,224,027 6,971,518,595 14,601,540,843 28,315,769,930
Exports of goods & services 0.62 4,891 440,775 5,101,760 102,597,714 993,749,526 4,237,475,183 12,751,806,262 25,532,920,157 48,987,996,386
Imports of goods & services 0.73 5,354 281,183 7,098,913 147,470,567 1,511,775,352 7,106,613,012 22,311,923,051 45,076,492,815 86,446,949,738
Stockbuilding -0.41 -191.5 -16,725 -312,273 -2,792,850 -12,674,929 -28,175,062 -43,059,438 -44,208,877 -42,025,124
Domestic demand 2.12 10,286 649,077 18,175,278 339,319,510 3,544,306,762 16,730,062,071 52,627,145,775 109,908,602,699 211,552,603,218
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 139.1 97.6 59.7 50.4 74.0 91.5 97.0 97.5 98.0 98.3
Private consumption 139.8 71.9 27.1 32.7 48.6 60.0 64.7 66.4 67.1 67.8
Government consumption 12.5 16.4 15.6 19.4 28.7 34.9 37.3 37.1 36.3 35.6
Gross fixed investment 22.9 15.8 6.5 5.5 8.7 12.6 15.2 15.8 15.8 16.0
Exports of goods & services 42.7 48.6 32.6 15.9 25.8 30.0 29.7 28.9 27.7 27.6
Imports of goods & services 50.7 53.2 20.8 22.1 37.1 45.7 49.7 50.5 48.9 48.8
Stockbuilding -28.1 -1.9 -1.2 -1.0 -0.7 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 147.1 102.2 47.9 56.7 85.3 107.2 117.1 119.1 119.2 119.4
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 100.5 73.7 45.3 64.9 65.7 65.6 66.7 68.1 68.5 69.0
Government consumption 9.0 16.8 26.1 38.4 38.8 38.2 38.5 38.0 37.0 36.2
Gross fixed investment 16.5 16.1 10.9 11.0 11.7 13.8 15.7 16.2 16.2 16.3
Stockbuilding -20.2 -1.9 -2.1 -1.9 -0.9 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.0
Exports of goods & services 30.7 49.8 54.5 31.5 34.8 32.8 30.6 29.6 28.3 28.1
Imports of goods & services 36.4 54.5 34.8 43.9 50.1 50.0 51.3 51.8 49.9 49.7
Memorandum items
Oil production ('000 b/d) 1,925 1,432 a 827 a 505 525 590 620 640 660 680
National savings ratio (%) -9.9 b 13.1 8.1 4.5 3.3 -3.6 -4.5 -1.6 -2.9 -3.6
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Real expenditure on GDP (BsS m at constant 1997 market prices)
GDP 0.39 0.32 0.20 0.14 0.14 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.18 0.18
Private consumption 0.27 0.22 0.13 0.10 0.10 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.13 0.13
Government consumption 0.09 0.08 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06
Gross fixed investment 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.02
Exports of goods & services 0.07 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04
Imports of goods & services 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.07
Stockbuilding -0.02 -0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Domestic demand 0.38 0.31 0.20 0.16 0.16 0.18 0.20 0.20 0.21 0.21
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP -15.7 -19.6 -37.3 -31.0 4.5 13.0 5.2 3.2 2.5 2.0
Private consumption -16.2 -20.1 -38.0 -24.4 3.0 13.0 4.9 3.7 2.8 2.1
Government consumption -7.2 -9.1 -26.8 -21.0 3.0 12.0 5.0 2.0 2.0 1.8
Fixed investment -45.3 -37.5 -50.0 -30.0 8.5 33.5 17.0 5.0 2.0 2.0
Exports of goods & services 0.0 -10.8 -27.7 -27.4 4.6 12.7 5.6 3.4 3.2 2.6
Imports of goods & services -34.7 0.3 -19.0 6.5 3.0 17.0 7.7 4.0 3.0 2.5
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -2.4 1.9 1.3 1.0 0.8 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand -21.1 -18.2 -35.7 -23.2 4.0 14.3 5.9 3.4 2.5 2.1
Real contribution to growth (%)
Private consumption -11.2 -13.8 -26.1 -16.5 2.3 9.5 3.6 2.7 2.0 1.6
Government consumption -1.5 -2.1 -6.9 -6.3 1.0 4.1 1.7 0.7 0.7 0.6
Gross fixed investment -7.0 -3.8 -3.9 -1.9 0.5 2.2 1.3 0.4 0.2 0.2
External balance 6.4 -1.8 -1.7 -7.3 0.0 -3.2 -1.6 -0.7 -0.4 -0.4
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Origin of GDP (BsS m at constant 1997 prices)
GDP at factor cost 0.39 0.32 0.20 0.14 0.14 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.18 0.18
Agriculture 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
Industry 0.11 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06
Services 0.27 0.23 0.14 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.11 0.11 0.12 0.12
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture -16.5 -16.3 -35.0 -30.0 3.8 8.0 3.0 2.5 2.5 2.2
Industry -23.2 -30.7 -28.0 -20.0 4.5 13.5 5.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
Services -12.1 -15.2 -40.5 -35.5 4.6 12.9 5.3 3.8 2.7 2.0
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 2.9 3.1 b 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0
Industry 28.4 24.5 b 28.1 32.6 32.6 32.7 32.7 32.3 32.2 32.2
Services 68.7 72.4 b 68.7 64.2 64.2 64.2 64.3 64.7 64.9 64.9
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Growth and productivity
Labour productivity growth (% -20.2 -22.9 4.6 6.2 1.5 2.7 -1.7 -1.8 0.5 0.8
Total factor productivity growth (%) -16.9 -19.6 -8.3 -5.2 5.6 9.4 3.4 2.7 3.9 3.9
Growth of capital stock (%) -4.8 -5.5 -6.2 -6.4 -6.3 -6.0 -5.8 -5.7 -5.6 -5.5
Growth of potential GDP (%) -15.0 -19.0 -27.7 -8.4 0.7 8.1 1.6 0.9 2.1 2.2
Growth of GDP (%) -15.7 c -19.6 c -37.3 -31.0 4.5 13.0 5.2 3.2 2.5 2.0
Growth of GDP per head (%) -16.8 -20.6 -33.3 -31.0 7.3 13.8 5.9 3.9 3.3 2.8
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 b 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c 2026 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 31.2 b 31.6 29.7 29.7 29.0 28.8 28.5 28.3 28.1 27.9
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 139.1 97.6 59.7 50.4 74.0 91.5 97.0 97.5 98.0 98.3
GDP (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 9 92 56.3 48.1 72.5 89.7 95.1 95.6 97.0 97.3
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 4,457 b 3,086 2,008 1,696 2,554 3,182 3,398 3,442 3,486 3,521
GDP per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 275 2,918 1,893 1,616 2,504 3,119 3,332 3,374 3,451 3,486
Private consumption (US$ bn) 139.8 71.9 27.1 32.7 48.6 60.0 64.7 66.4 67.1 67.8
Private consumption (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 9 68 25.5 31.2 47.7 58.8 63.5 65.1 66.4 67.2
Private consumption per head (US$) 4,480 b 2,270 910 1,100 1,680 2,090 2,270 2,340 2,390 2,430
Private consumption per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 276 2,151 858 1,048 1,645 2,045 2,223 2,298 2,363 2,406
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 333.2 274.3 175.1 122.3 130.2 150.5 162.2 170.8 178.5 186.3
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 10,670 b 8,670 5,890 4,110 4,490 5,230 5,680 6,030 6,350 6,680
Personal disposable income (BsS bn) 2.24 b 8,192.57 413,761.55 11,327,030.55 208,166,334 2,149,169,703 10,128,744,005 32,476,330,465 69,213,930,456 135,528,022,604
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 155.3 b 81.4 30.6 35.3 52.3 65.0 70.9 73.5 75.1 76.5
Growth of real disposable income (%) -16.2 b -18.6 -38.1 -27.7 2.7 13.7 6.0 4.9 3.8 3.0
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.42 b 0.42 0.39 0.39 0.37 0.37 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.35
Share of world GDP (%; market exchange rates) 0.17 0.11 0.07 0.06 0.08 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08
Share of world GDP (%; PPP) 0.28 0.22 0.13 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.20 0.18 a 0.10 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05
a Actual. b EIU estimates. c EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
NFPS expenditure 40.5 47.9 26.7 20.1 23.6 26.1 26.3 26.1 25.9 25.9
Interest 1.1 1.5 2.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.1 -0.1 -0.1
Non-interest expenditure 39.4 46.4 24.4 20.1 23.5 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0
NFPS revenue 17.5 16.9 16.7 15.1 16.4 19.5 19.8 18.6 18.1 18.1
NFPS balance -23.0 -31.0 -10.0 -5.0 -7.2 -6.6 -6.5 -7.5 -7.8 -7.8
Primary balance -21.9 -29.5 -7.7 -5.0 -7.1 -6.5 -6.2 -7.4 -7.9 -7.9
Government debt 36.1 180.8 232.8 304.1 317.0 329.0 336.0 348.0 360.0 372.0
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (av) 0.0144 100.7 13,537.3 320,729.3 3,979,008.9 33,074,109 142,896,126 441,713,118 922,092,143 1,771,945,546
Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (end‑period) 0.0498 587.9 44,482.7 1,067,277.9 8,923,133.4 67,491,217 238,966,569 650,415,829 1,203,671,115 2,373,155,176
Parallel exchange rate BsS:US$ (av) 0.0002 0.1065 14.4 336.5 4,058.6 33,735.6 145,754.1 450,547.4 931,313. 1 1,789,665.0
Exchange rate BsS:€1 (av) 0.0163 119.0 15,156.3 36,6042.5 4,751,265.9 38,696,707 163,973,305 519,012,913 1,120,341,954 2,197,212,477
Exchange rate BsS:€1 (end-period) 0.0598 673.1 49,971.9 1,309,656.9 10,529,297.4 78,289,812 274,811,554 777,246,916 1,480,515,472 2,966,443,969
Real effective exchange rate (av) CPI-based 2,321.8 3,289.8 4,295 6,798 9,602 10,284 10,338 9,940 9,484 9,084
Real effective exchange rate (av) PPI-based 36.9 51.6 67.1 103.6 148.8 159.2 159.0 151.7 143.7 137.0
Real effective exchange rate (av) ULC-based 58.7 6.3 2.3 2.6 3.9 4.5 4.7 4.7 4.4 4.2
Purchasing power parity BsS:US$1 (av) 0.01 c 35.82 4,617.75 132,236.03 2,261,704.4 20,113,990.7 85,474,887 252,144,827 506,149,454 934,494,333
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 1,170.0 c 63,282.9 c 4,945.6 c 1,286.8 c 1,316.7 927.8 356.3 209.6 109.8 92.7
Domestic credit growth (%) 596.6 118,213.2 2,161.8 1,646.7 1,703.2 1,333.2 371.7 210.9 110.4 92.9
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 21.1 c 22.3 c 28.7 c 13.2 c 10.1 6.4 8.0 14.3 16.3 17.2
Deposit interest rate (%; av) 14.7 c 14.6 c 30.6 c 52.9 c 41.9 20.1 13.0 11.3 11.3 11.2
Money market interest rate (%; av) 0.5 c 4.0 c 96.5 c 173.5 c 244.4 b 60.2 26.4 17.3 13.5 10.9
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 15.1 15.7 11.5 11.4 10.9 11.0 11.0 11.1 11.1 11.1
Labour force (% change) 5.5 3.9 -26.5 -1.5 -4.2 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2
Employment (m) 14.0 14.6 8.8 5.7 5.9 6.5 6.9 7.3 7.4 7.5
Employment (% change) -10.0 -20.0 -40.0 -35.0 3.0 10.0 7.0 5.0 2.0 1.2
Unemployment (m) 1.1 1.1 2.8 5.7 5.0 4.6 4.1 3.8 3.7 3.6
Unemployment rate (%) 7.2 6.9 24.0 49.8 46.1 41.4 37.5 34.5 33.4 32.8
Wage and price inflation (%)
Consumer prices (av) 982.8 1,005,130.7 17,365.2 3,634.1 1,688.7 807.7 344.6 205.7 105.3 90.1
Consumer prices (end-period) 2,581.8 1,699,183.5 7,374.4 3,713.3 1,304.1 625.7 293.8 151.6 90.1 90.1
Producer prices (av) 1,026.0 1,005,130.7 17,365.2 3,634.1 1,688.7 807.7 344.6 205.7 105.3 90.1
GDP deflator (av) 748.1 c 608,228.5 13,023.2 2,798.2 1,641.1 809.8 335.6 201.2 104.8 88.9
Private consumption deflator (av) 899.2 c 448,578.1 8,065.0 3,688.4 1,688.7 807.7 344.6 205.7 105.3 90.1
Government consumption deflator (av) 646.3 c 1,005,125.2 17,358.4 3,627.8 1,683.9 803.2 339.8 200.8 100.4 85.2
Fixed investment deflator (av) 1,495.4 c 767,785.2 11,044.2 2,770.1 1,688.7 807.7 344.6 205.7 105.3 90.1
Average nominal wages 816.7 58,631.0 5,000.0 2,800.0 1,740.0 915.7 359.3 212.1 109.0 93.0
Average real wages -15.3 -94.2 -70.8 -22.3 2.9 11.9 3.3 2.1 1.8 1.5
Unit labour costs (BsS-based) 1,048.7 76,072.1 4,777.9 2,630.7 1,713.1 889.0 367.3 217.6 108.0 91.5
Unit labour costs (US$-based) -14.7 -89.1 -63.7 15.3 46.1 19.0 8.2 2.8 -0.3 -0.4
Labour costs per hour (BsS m) 0.00000 0.0000 0.0007 0.0208 0.38 3.9 17.8 55.7 116.4 224.6
Labour costs per hour (US$) 1.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 9.5 c 9.2 c 7.8 -2.4 0.4 1.4 1.9 1.9 1.3 1.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 6.8 c 9.4 13.1 -4.8 0.5 1.5 1.9 2.0 1.4 1.1
Goods: exports fob 34.0 c 33.7 c 19.3 6.1 11.0 13.6 14.2 13.6 13.2 13.0
Goods: imports fob -12.0 c -12.8 c -6.7 -7.9 -10.5 -12.4 -12.9 -12.0 -12.0 -12.1
Trade balance 22.0 c 20.9 c 12.6 -1.7 0.5 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.2 0.9
Services: credit 1.1 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Services: debit -6.7 -6.4 -5.4 -3.5 -3.7 -4.2 -4.5 -4.8 -5.2 -5.4
Services balance -5.6 c -5.7 c -5.0 -3.2 -3.3 -3.8 -4.0 -4.2 -4.5 -4.6
Primary income: credit 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6
Primary income: debit -8.2 -8.9 -4.0 -2.1 -2.4 -2.7 -2.9 -3.2 -3.5 -3.7
Primary income balance -7.6 c -8.0 c -3.6 -1.9 -2.2 -2.3 -2.4 -2.7 -2.9 -3.2
Secondary income: credit 0.8 2.3 3.8 4.5 5.5 6.3 6.9 7.3 7.7 8.1
Secondary income: debit -0.2 -0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1
Secondary income balance 0.6 c 2.0 c 3.8 4.5 5.4 6.2 6.8 7.3 7.6 8.0
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 45.7 58.2 54.0 36.3 56.3 58.2 54.4 51.3 47.7 46.4
Export prices (% change) -49.2 27.4 -7.3 -32.8 55.0 3.4 -6.5 -5.8 -7.0 -2.7
Import price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 275.9 288.5 139.0 139.1 226.1 238.3 240.8 235.1 220.9 215.1
Import prices (% change) 8.5 4.6 -51.8 0.1 62.6 5.4 1.0 -2.3 -6.0 -2.6
Terms of trade (2005=100) 16.6 20.2 38.9 26.1 24.9 24.4 22.6 21.8 21.6 21.6
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 7.5 6.1 -1.6 -7.3 10.9 5.7 5.7 4.4 3.5 3.5
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment -0.1 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 1.1 1.0 1.0
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 0.0 0.9 1.6 1.9 1.3 1.1 1.2 1.1 1.0 1.0
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) -0.3 5.6 14.3 17.3 11.3 8.0 7.9 6.8 6.3 5.9
Outward direct investment -2.2 -0.7 -0.7 -0.5 -0.6 -0.6 -0.6 -0.7 -0.7 -0.7
Net foreign direct investment -2.3 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3
Stock of inward direct investment 30.1 31.0 31.9 32.9 33.9 34.9 36.1 37.2 38.2 39.1
Stock of inward direct investment per head (US$) 964.4 980.4 1,073.3 1,105.5 1,168.8 1,212.9 1,264.2 1,311.7 1,357.0 1,401.3
Stock of inward direct investment (% of GDP) 21.6 31.8 53.4 65.2 45.8 38.1 37.2 38.1 38.9 39.8
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.00 0.19 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.10 0.08 0.07 0.07
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.10 0.10 0.09 0.10 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 a 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b 2026 b
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 164.6 c 167.8 c 168.1 c 161.6 166.0 171.6 174.6 178.6 179.7 182.5
Total external debt (% of GDP) 118.3 172.0 281.4 320.4 224.4 187.5 180.0 183.2 183.3 185.7
Total external debt (% of GDP, at parallel exchange rate) 1,919.2 c 181.9 c 298.4 c 336.2 228.9 191.3 183.6 186.9 185.2 187.6
Debt/exports ratio (%) 458.8 468.9 801.1 2,140.4 1,309.2 1,089.7 1,048.7 1,103.1 1,123.6 1,143.3
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 3.6 3.5 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.6 2.3 3.4 4.5
a EIU estimates. b EIU forecasts. c Actual.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data; EIU is the source for all forecast data unless otherwise stated
Global data Oil prices: dated Brent
US and OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
US and OECD growth: OECD
US 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
US$ effective exchange rate: IMF, IFS; nominal weighted index
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
Domestic data Balance of payments, exchange and interest rates: IMF, IFS
Budget balance: non-financial public sector
Commercial banks' prime lending rate: average nominal interest rate charged on loans to agriculture
Deposit interest rate: average nominal interest rate on 90-day term deposits
Exchange rate: IMF, IFS; market rates expressed as BsS:US$
External debt; World Bank, International Debt Statistics
GDP: at constant 1997 prices, BCV
Inflation: BCV, consumer price index (1997=100) for the Caracas metropolitan area
Labour market statistics: derived from a series given in ILO, Yearbook of Labour Statistics
Oil production and export volumes: Bloomberg
Population: Centro Latinoamericano y Caribeño de Demografía (Celade, Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre)
Social indicators: World Bank, World Development Indicators
Stock of foreign investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report
Abbreviations BCV: Banco Central de Venezuela (the central bank)
IFS: International Financial Statistics
ILO: International Labour Organisation
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development

Subject: Tax rates; Contempt of court; Legislatures; Foreign exchange rates; Electricity distribution; Politics; Sanctions; Foreign investment; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Patronage; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Petroleum production; Tax reform; Wage & price controls; Labor market; COVID-19; Economic forecasts; Economic crisis

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Foreign exchange rates Sanctions Foreign investment International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Petroleum production Tax reform Wage & price controls Labor market Economic forecasts Economic crisis; Industry: 92112 :‎ Legislative Bodies

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Classification: 92112: Legislative Bodies

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Forecast Venezuela October 2021 Updater

Publication title: Country Forecast. Venezuela; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Oct 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Political Science, Business And Economics

ISSN: 09669574

e-ISSN: 20489773

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611014439

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-october-2021-updater/docview/2611014439/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Norway September 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-norway-september-2021/docview/2611016190/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Economic outlook 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Real GDP growth (%) -1.3 3.0 2.9 2.5 2.1 2.0 Consumer price inflation (av, %) 1.3 3.0 2.6 1.9 1.8 1.8 Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.0 -3.0 -2.5 -0.9 0.6 0.5 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.0 6.9 6.8 5.6 3.3 1.6 3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 0.7 0.3 0.6 1.2 1.7 1.9 Exchange rate Nkr:US$ (av) 9.4 8.6 8.4 8.6 8.8 8.9 Norway recorded one of the mildest economic downturns in Europe in 2020 amid the pandemic, owing in part to a comparatively low infection rate, extensive policy support and the underlying structure of the economy. Demographic outlook Population (m) 2015 2020 2025 Total 5.2 5.4 5.6 Male 2.6 2.7 2.8 Female 2.6 2.7 2.8 Period averages (%) 2016-20 2021-25 Population growth 0.7 0.8 Working-age population growth 0.4 0.5 Labour force growth 0.5 0.3 Annual population growth has moderated over the past decade, mainly in response to reduced net immigration, alongside a gradual fall in the "natural increase". Long-term outlook 2021-30 2031-50 2021-50 Growth and productivity (% change; annual av) Growth of real GDP per head 1.2 0.8 0.9 Growth of real GDP 2.1 1.4 1.6 Labour productivity growth 1.1 1.0 1.0 High labour market participation means that future growth will depend on gains in productivity and investment, both of which will steadily accrue over the forecast period. Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 5.4 Population growth 0.7 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 361.2 Real GDP growth 0.8 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 339.3 Real domestic demand growth 0.6 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 67,075 Inflation 2.3 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 63,012 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.5 Exchange rate (av) Nkr:US$ 9.42 FDI inflows (% of GDP) -0.4 a Actual.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Norway&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Norway+September+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-15&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Norway&amp;rft.issn=09669450&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - The incumbent centre-right coalition lost the September 2021 parliamentary election and will be replaced by a left-of-centre coalition led by the Labour Party. Coalition talks were ongoing at the time of writing, but a three-party majority coalition is likely, also comprising the agrarian-populist Centre Party and the Socialist Left Party (SV). Despite the SV's aim to bring an end to oil exploration, the Centre Party and Labour are more aligned in their view to "develop rather than discontinue" the industry. Considering the economy's still high dependence on the oil sector, the implementation of revised policies to diversify the economy and accelerate green initiatives seems a likely compromise.

Norway--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.86 8.26 14 6 8 4
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

- Norway's business environment score improves in the forecast period (2021-25), in response to ongoing reforms and as uncertainty arising from the coronavirus pandemic dissipates. The country's global ranking increases by eight places to sixth, with Norway ranked as the fourth most attractive business location in western Europe. A shift to a left-leaning government will drive modest changes to tax and labour market policy. Strengths of the business environment include stable and transparent political and regulatory structures, openness to trade and foreign investment, a low regulatory burden, a skilled labour force and high-quality network infrastructure, backed by the country's substantial oil wealth. Weaker aspects are Norway's small market size, high labour costs and restricted access to some product markets.

Norway--highlights: Economic outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Real GDP growth (%) -1.3 3.0 2.9 2.5 2.1 2.0
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 1.3 3.0 2.6 1.9 1.8 1.8
Budget balance (% of GDP) -3.0 -3.0 -2.5 -0.9 0.6 0.5
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.0 6.9 6.8 5.6 3.3 1.6
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 0.7 0.3 0.6 1.2 1.7 1.9
Exchange rate Nkr:US$ (av) 9.4 8.6 8.4 8.6 8.8 8.9

- Norway recorded one of the mildest economic downturns in Europe in 2020 amid the pandemic, owing in part to a comparatively low infection rate, extensive policy support and the underlying structure of the economy. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects a firm rebound in 2021-22, with real GDP surpassing its pre-crisis level earlier than most regional peers. Private consumption on the mainland will lead the recovery, driven by the release of pent-up demand and accumulated savings, with growth in exports (particularly in the non-oil sector) playing a supporting role. Amid a gradual normalisation of economic conditions, Norges Bank (the central bank) is expected to begin to tighten monetary policy before end-2021. Unemployment has fallen back towards its pre-pandemic level, but the uneven disruption from the pandemic raises the risk of labour market mismatches.

Norway--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2015 2020 2025
Total 5.2 5.4 5.6
 Male 2.6 2.7 2.8
 Female 2.6 2.7 2.8
Period averages (%)   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth   0.7 0.8
Working-age population growth   0.4 0.5
Labour force growth   0.5 0.3

- Annual population growth has moderated over the past decade, mainly in response to reduced net immigration, alongside a gradual fall in the "natural increase". The pandemic contributed to a further decline in net immigration in 2020-to a 20-year low. We expect a mild acceleration in population growth over the forecast period as global economic conditions firm and as international travel normalises, supporting a modest upturn in migrant inflows, attracted by Norway's high living standards and robust social safety net. A gradual ageing of the population will continue amid a slowly declining fertility rate and increasing life expectancy. Compared with other Nordic countries, Norway's demography is better suited to future growth, with the share of the working-age population higher than in peer countries. Still, an ageing population will push up costs in the pensions and healthcare systems over the forecast period.

Norway--highlights: Market opportunities   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 361.2 433.1 467.6 473.6 471.5 477.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 67,075 79,771 85,418 85,796 84,690 85,087
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 177.5 199.8 213.6 216.3 218.5 224.2
Household consumption (US$ bn) 159.0 188.2 206.9 214.2 217.5 223.2
Household consumption per head (US$) 29,530 34,670 37,800 38,800 39,080 39,770

- Market opportunities are constrained by the small size of the population (5.4m in 2020). However, Norwegian households are the sixth-wealthiest in the world, measured by GDP per head in purchasing power parity (PPP) terms. The consumer goods market is modest in size, similar to those of Denmark and Portugal, and about one-tenth that of the UK. Household consumption per head (at US$29,530 in 2020) is among the highest in western Europe and above all its Nordic peers. Norway's private consumption as a share of GDP is lower than in most western European economies, mainly owing to a large public sector.

Norway--highlights: Long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 1.2 0.8 0.9
Growth of real GDP 2.1 1.4 1.6
Labour productivity growth 1.1 1.0 1.0

- High labour market participation means that future growth will depend on gains in productivity and investment, both of which will steadily accrue over the forecast period. Diminishing oil and gas reserves will force continued reform of the healthcare and pension systems, with the vast Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG, the sovereign wealth fund) supporting the public finances over this period. Further integration of technology and the steady improvement in the population's skills levels will encourage long-term growth.

Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 5.4 Population growth 0.7
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 361.2 Real GDP growth 0.8
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 339.3 Real domestic demand growth 0.6
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 67,075 Inflation 2.3
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 63,012 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.5
Exchange rate (av) Nkr:US$ 9.42 FDI inflows (% of GDP) -0.4
a Actual.
Background: The Labour Party governed almost continuously from 1935 to 1965, and dominated until 2001, when a minority coalition of the Conservatives, the Christian Democrats (KrF) and the Liberals came to power. Labour returned to office in 2005 in a centre-left coalition with the Socialist Left Party (SV) and the Centre Party-the first majority government for two decades. The 2013 election produced a minority right-of-centre coalition of the Conservatives and the far-right Progress Party (FrP), which remained in office after the 2017 vote. The right-leaning coalition was joined by the Liberals in 2018 and by the KrF in 2019, with the FrP withdrawing from the government in early 2020 in a dispute over infrastructure funding. The September 2021 election saw a swing in support to left-leaning parties, with coalition talks widely expected to lead to the formation of a majority left-of-centre government of Labour, the Centre Party and the SV.
Political structure: There is no right of dissolution between elections. Norway uses a modified proportional representation system: 150 out of the 169 members of the unicameral Storting (parliament) are "district mandates" elected by open-list proportional representation. The remaining 19 seats, the "levelling mandates", are distributed only between the parties that get more than 4% of the national vote and whose initial seat count (out of 150) is not proportional to their share of the vote.
Policy issues: The September 2021 election was dominated by issues of climate change, energy policy and inequality, with the role of Norway's large oil and gas sector expected to come under increasing policy scrutiny. Amid calls for an immediate end to exploration on the Norwegian continental shelf, the consensus view remains to "develop rather than discontinue' the industry. Considering the economy's still high dependence on the petroleum sector, this is likely to sit alongside policies aimed at further diversifying the mainland economy, accelerating green initiatives, raising the tax burden on the wealthy and strengthening the welfare system. Spending from Norway's huge oil fund will remain within fiscal guidelines.
Taxation: The headline corporation tax rate is 22%, lowered in stages from 27% in 2014. Oil companies pay an additional flat-rate tax of 50% on income derived from the extraction, processing and transport of oil, but benefit from a 78% tax refund on costs of exploration for oil and gas. The standard rate of value-added tax (VAT) is 25%, but reduced rates apply widely. The top marginal income tax rate is 54.3% (including employers' social security contributions).
Foreign trade: Oil and gas output and prices greatly affect Norway's trade flows. The petroleum industry contributes about half of all goods export revenue. Amid pandemic-driven fluctuations in trade and capital flows, the current-account surplus narrowed to a 20-year low of US$7.2bn (2% of GDP) in 2020. The current account will remain in surplus in 2021-25.
Major exports 2020 % of total Major imports 2020 % of total
Mineral fuels, lubricants & related materials 49.1 Machinery & transport equipment 39.5
Food & live animals 14.3 Miscellaneous manufactured articles 14.8
Manufactured goods 11.2 Manufactured goods 14.0
Machinery & transport equipment 11.2 Chemicals & related products 10.3
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
UK 18.2 China 12.1
Germany 12.2 Germany 11.5
Netherlands 10.2 Sweden 10.7
Sweden 10.0 US 6.8
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance Norway is a multiparty parliamentary democracy; minority governments are normally supported by one or more parties in opposition. The constitution is the second-oldest in the world after the US and provides for a single legislative chamber (Storting; parliament) of 169 members, with elections every four years. Similar to the other Nordic countries, there is a clear left-right divide among the political parties, and the political system has consolidated into blocs of parties with fairly similar views. As in many countries, the political scene has become gradually more fragmented over the past decade, amid more polarised positions on specific issues such as immigration and the environment. Overall, however, domestic politics in Norway remains more collaborative and tends to produce more stable governments than in many other developed countries. This is in part because parliament does not have the right to call an early election, so spikes in instability do not often result in a change of parliamentary arithmetic. Moreover, the Storting uses a committee system for passing legislation, with an emphasis on building cross-party consensus, and only the most contentious policies lead to a parliamentary vote. Extensive powers are devolved to the 11 counties and 356 municipalities (reduced from 19 and 428, respectively, since 2020 following an administrative reform). The parliamentary election in September 2021 saw a rise in support for left-leaning parties after eight years of centre-right government. At the time of writing, by far the most likely outcome of coalition talks is the formation of a three-party majority left-of-centre government led by the Labour Party, alongside the populist-agrarian Centre Party and the Socialist Left Party (SV), replacing the outgoing minority centre-right coalition of the Conservatives, the Liberals and the Christian Democrats (KrF). The far-right Progress Party (FrP) had been part of the outgoing government, but withdrew in early 2020.
Parliamentary forces
  2017 2021    
  % of vote % of vote Seats (no.) Change in seats (no.)
Labour Party 27.4 26.4 48 -1
Conservatives 25.0 20.5 36 -9
Centre Party 10.3 13.6 28 +9
Progress Party 15.2 11.7 21 -6
Socialist Left Party 6.0 7.5 13 +2
Red Party 2.4 4.7 8 +7
Liberals 4.4 4.6 8 0
Greens 3.2 3.9 3 +2
Christian Democrats 4.2 3.8 3 -5
Others 1.8 3.3 1 +1
Total 100.0 100.0 169 -
Political outlook: Political stability The ruling coalition, comprising the centre-right Conservatives and two small centrist parties-the Liberals and the KrF-lost the general election on September 13th and will be replaced by a centre-left coalition led by the Labour Party. The Conservatives lost significant support compared with their 2017 result, securing 36 seats, down from 45 (out of a total of 169). The party's popularity has ebbed after eight years in power, while the centre-left Labour Party's emphasis on addressing social inequality during the election campaign resonated with the electorate, particularly following the coronavirus-induced recession last year. The Labour Party secured 48 seats, putting it in the driving seat to begin coalition talks. The Economist Intelligence Unit's baseline forecast is that, after several weeks of negotiations, Labour is likely to reach an agreement with the Centre Party (28 seats) and the SV (13 seats), which would give the new coalition a four-seat parliamentary majority.
We expect political stability to remain firm by international comparison, partly reflecting Norway's solid track record of cross-party co-operation and consensus-building. The Labour Party and the Centre Party are fairly well aligned in terms of policy preferences, but the Centre Party and the SV are not natural partners, with the Centre Party having previously stated that it would not enter into a coalition government with the SV. Although we expect the Centre Party to backtrack on that pledge, there will be tensions within the coalition, which are likely to hamper its ability to govern to some extent during 2021-25. Policy priorities are likely to include addressing social inequality through increasing public investment in education and healthcare, as well as streamlining government services. The Centre Party is likely to press for measures to accelerate decentralisation and bolster infrastructure and incomes in rural areas. There will also be a continued emphasis in the near term on monitoring the risk from new variants of the coronavirus and of ensuring that booster vaccines are rolled out to at-risk individuals. However, the competent handling of the crisis domestically has made the coronavirus pandemic a less salient political issue than in some other developed countries.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness Norway boasts a high-quality governance framework, similar to its Nordic peers. With its long tradition of transparent parliamentary democracy, the multiparty structure and consensual style of politics has tended to deliver legislation that is typically passed after broad consultation with opposition parties and interest groups. Elections are free and fair, with universal suffrage, and the transfer of power is peaceful and accepted. Corruption is low, the public administration is competent and the legal framework is stable and non-discriminatory. These factors all underpin an effective political system that is characterised by higher levels of public trust and political legitimacy than in most other countries. This transparent and trusted political framework has almost certainly contributed to Norway faring relatively well (in a regional and global context) at containing the coronavirus pandemic, in terms of health outcomes and the macroeconomic impact, as well as delivering one of the world's highest vaccination rates.
We expect Norway to retain its high score for government effectiveness, and the country's robust institutional structures will remain one of its main strengths. The consensus-driven nature of Norwegian politics can at times lead to sluggish progress in the passage of legislation and implementation of reforms relative to some peer countries, but it is a subjective view as to whether this is a positive or negative feature.
As European integration has proceeded since 2007, the Storting has taken a more strident role in scrutinising European rules transposed into law as part of Norway's membership of the European Economic Area (EEA). In the context of the UK's exit from the EU, there is support in some sections of parliament for a more distant relationship with Europe, particularly within the FrP. However, we view a substantial revision of Norway's relationship with the EU, either for or against future integration, as unlikely.
There is a large amount of devolved power to regional authorities Policymaking is centred in the capital, Oslo, but implementation is largely left to regional authorities, which decentralises the government's functions. The system works well, with sub-national government comprised of municipalities and counties that have equal rights and responsibilities, regardless of their size. Functions are divided between these regional branches. Municipal government supervises junior education, health and social care, and town planning and infrastructure. County government oversees development and planning region-wide, including roads, public transport and adult education. The rising role of digital administration has contributed to a steady reduction in red tape across all aspects of government, and successive governments have attempted to make central and municipal administrations more efficient. However, disparities persist in digital capabilities among different local governments, with more populous regions, such as Oslo, providing more expansive services than rural regions.
A reform of local government was implemented in January 2020, reducing the number of municipalities from 428 to 356 and the number of counties from 19 to 11. The stated aims of the restructuring are to reduce costs, strengthen local democracy, and improve the quality of local services by giving municipalities more autonomy and greater scope to exploit economies of scale. The measure is similar to that implemented by Denmark in 2007, which was broadly effective in streamlining government administration, although the impact on services is more open to interpretation. The reforms destabilise some aspects of regional government and devolve new areas of responsibility, including road networks, broadband development and innovation, to the restructured municipalities. The reform has met with some strong public and political criticism, especially among more rural and isolated communities, amid fears over reduced local influence and a loss of financial autonomy compared with the previous framework. The populist agrarian Centre Party, a likely coalition partner in government following the September 2021 election, could push for revisions to the reform.
Political outlook: Election watch The most recent general election was held on September 13th. The Storting (parliament) cannot be dissolved before completing a full four-year term, meaning that there is no risk of a snap election before the next poll in September 2025. The political scene is fairly fragmented, with the Labour Party securing the largest share of the vote (only 26.4%) in the recent election, followed by the Conservatives (20.5%). The Centre Party polled at 13.6%, followed by the FrP (11.7%) and the SV (7.5%). Before the election, there had been significant focus on two smaller parties, the left-wing Red Party and the environmentalist Green Party. Those parties won only 4-5% of the vote each, but they fared much better than in the 2017 election and collectively increased their parliamentary representation to 11 seats, from just two previously. This could amount to a significant pull towards more pro-green initiatives.
Political outlook: International relations EU relations will remain a significant foreign policy issue, and may steadily encroach on domestic politics as environmental affairs become increasingly prominent. As a member of the EEA, Norway has access to the single market (in exchange for contributions to the EU budget), but must accept relevant EU regulations while having limited influence over them.
Tensions with Russia have risen significantly in the past year, with Norway accusing it of orchestrating a cyber-attack on the Storting (particularly targeting the Labour Party). The government responded to the attack with a drive to upgrade defence infrastructure in the north of the country. With a Labour-led coalition set to take office, we expect cool relations with Russia to persist throughout the forecast period, with Norway rebuilding its defence capabilities.
Relations with the UK following its exit from the EU will also remain a focus of Norway's foreign policy. The UK's withdrawal from the common fisheries policy (which grants fishing fleets access to domestic waters) has been replaced with annual negotiations between the UK and Norwegian governments over fishing access. An agreement was struck on June 4th, giving British farmers market access to Norway in exchange for UK concessions on fisheries. The deal is relatively recent and could generate some domestic political backlash in the coming months.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
Overall position 7.86 8.26 14 6 8 4
Political environment 9.3 9.3 2 2 2 2
 Political stability 9.6 9.6 2 2 2 2
 Political effectiveness 9.0 9.0 4 5 2 3
Macroeconomic environment 8.6 9.2 3 1 5 1
Market opportunities 5.4 6.8 32 24 11 8
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 8.3 8.3 13 12 6 6
Policy towards foreign investment 8.7 8.7 10 6 8 2
Foreign trade & exchange controls 9.1 8.7 14 22 8 13
Taxes 6.0 7.4 45 23 12 6
Financing 8.5 9.3 3 1 1 1
The labour market 6.6 6.7 26 30 11 11
Infrastructure 8.3 8.5 11 10 8 7
Technological readiness 7.8 8.3 23 20 11 10
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Norway offers one of the world's most attractive businesses environments Norway's score in The Economist Intelligence Unit's business environment model improves from 7.86 (out of 10) in the historical period (2016-20) to 8.26 in the forecast period (2021-25). The country rises by eight places in the global rankings, to sixth, and by four places at regional level to be ranked as the fourth most attractive business location in western Europe, behind Switzerland, Germany and Denmark. Modest improvements are expected in most categories, including the macroeconomic environment, financing, taxes and technological readiness. Norway scores reasonably highly in most business environment categories. Its main strengths are stable and transparent political and regulatory environments, resilient macroeconomic conditions, a low regulatory burden, openness to trade and foreign investment, a skilled labour force, good financing options, and high-quality transport and digital infrastructure. The macroeconomic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic has been less disruptive than in many of its regional peers, leaving it well positioned for its recovery phase, although lagged effects could emerge in the labour market and financial sector as crisis support measures are wound down. Policy towards foreign investment will remain fairly attractive amid regional moves to tighten scrutiny of capital inflows, with oil and gas investments supported by temporary tax-relief measures. The lagged impact of earlier reforms is reflected in the improved score for taxes, amid a shift in the overall burden towards indirect taxation. An incoming left-leaning government is likely to target social inequalities by raising taxes on wealth and energy, while easing the labour tax burden on lower-income earners. Amid ongoing efforts to diversify the mainland economy, support for the petroleum sector will be very gradually tightened. Weaker areas of the business environment mostly relate to Norway's small market size (limiting domestic growth opportunities), elevated living and labour costs, restricted access to some product and services markets and skilled labour mismatches.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Norway's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2021-22: Increased state intervention in response to coronavirus pandemic diminishes gradually, but remains above pre-crisis level. Some restricted market access amid fairly high level of state ownership. Low regulatory burden for most firms.
2023-25: State intervention pushes green and digital goals.
Policy towards foreign investment 2021-22: Generally positive stance towards foreign investment, but inflows constrained by uncertain outlook, tightened investment screening regime and regional pushback against inflows from China. Firm investment trend in oil sector.
2023-25: Ongoing economic diversification efforts to attract investment in the non-oil mainland economy, such as in ICT.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2021-22: Steady rebound in world trade flows, but testing backdrop amid US-China tensions and increased protectionism. More complex EU-China trade relations could hinder progress towards Norway-China free-trade agreement.
2023-25: Gradual progress on bilateral trade deals via European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Changes to European Economic Area (EEA) membership unlikely.
Taxes 2021-22: Modest changes likely under left-leaning government aimed at shifting the tax burden more towards the wealthy. Earlier temporary tax-relief measures support investment in petroleum sector. Gradual multi-year rise in carbon tax.
2023-25: Likely changes to subsidy regime for oil and gas exploration. Possible reforms to generous housing tax incentives and structure of various wealth-related taxes. Moves to broaden the value-added tax (VAT) base and reduce complexities.
Financing 2021-22: Gradual rise in policy interest rates likely, but overall financing environment remains favourable amid state-backed liquidity-support schemes and underlying resilience of banking sector.
2023-25: Banks' exposure to volatile real estate markets could be tested as crisis support measures are wound down. Growth of non-bank financing channels, including private equity and venture capital. Tighter anti-money-laundering rules.
The labour market 2021-22: Steady recovery after fairly resilient performance during pandemic. Focus switches from job-protection measures to targeted training and job-search support, given uneven impact on labour market groups. Growing risk of skills mismatches.
2023-25: Skills shortages remain an issue in some sectors. Ongoing gradual efforts to raise labour participation.
Infrastructure 2021-22: Government applies 12-year transport plan (2018-29) and raises funds available for maintenance and construction of infrastructure projects. Steady progress in rollout of fifth-generation (5G) mobile services.
2023-25: Investments in new road and rail transport links are made. Digital infrastructure upgrades continue.
Technological developments 2021-22: Focus on strengthening digital skills in labour force, digitisation of businesses and e-government services.
2023-25: The Open Artificial Intelligence (AI) lab grows in size and importance, underpinning AI preparedness.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.6 9.2 3 1 5 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Norway is well positioned to recover from a mild, pandemic-driven downturn The improvement in Norway's category score and rankings in the forecast period reflects a number of factors: one of the mildest economic downturns in Europe in 2020 amid the coronavirus pandemic; some of the lowest infection rates and highest vaccination rates globally; firm momentum in the economy prior to the pandemic, supported by competitiveness gains and a robust labour market; and sound fundamentals and policy stability that have long underpinned Norway's macroeconomic framework. The country's strong welfare state and the structure of the economy helped to contain the fallout from the pandemic, with a fairly resilient petroleum sector (notwithstanding a temporary slump in oil prices) and modest exposure to hard-hit consumer-facing services industries. Virus variant risks will persist and lagged effects could emerge in pockets of the labour market (via labour mismatches) and financial sector as extensive support measures are wound down. However, macroeconomic fundamentals such as robust public finances (backed by the Government Pension Fund Global-the vast sovereign wealth fund), a large external surplus, moderate inflation, substantial corporate and household savings, a resilient financial sector and strong institutional underpinnings should support a firm economic rebound in 2021-22 and help to mitigate medium-term "scarring". Norges Bank (the central bank) is likely to be among the first in developed economies to begin to tighten monetary policy.

- Structurally weaker aspects of the macroeconomic environment include elevated household indebtedness, a frothy housing market, ageing demographics and a still significant dependence on the oil and gas sector (with related exposure to fluctuations in world demand and the oil price). Against a global backdrop of rising protectionism, trade tensions and changing environmental perspectives, prospects for medium-term growth are likely to become more closely tied to economic diversification away from oil.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.3 8.3 13 12 6 6
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
State ownership of strategic assets is higher than other countries Norway offers a fairly attractive environment for private enterprise, with a low burden of regulation, strong property rights protection, an effective legal system and support for entrepreneurship. However, overall market access is more limited than in most other regional economies, reflecting a comparatively high level of direct state ownership. In common with many peer countries, we do not expect a material improvement in 2021-25, with the category score and regional ranking unchanged. State involvement across the economy has increased during the pandemic (as in most European countries) and will remain at a higher level than in the pre-crisis period, reflecting also a shift in policy under the incoming left-leaning government. There is an established framework of competition law. The Norwegian Competition Authority (NCA) has proved reasonably effective in its policing of cartels and abuse of market dominance.

- Some 70 companies are under direct state ownership, including the largest energy group, Equinor (formerly Statoil); the largest telecommun-ications provider, Telenor; the largest financial services institution, DNB; the postal service; and other major businesses in the transport, energy, chemicals, finance, forestry and communications sectors, among others. The eight-year term of the outgoing centre-right government involved only limited divestments of state shareholdings. Privatisation is unlikely under a new left-leaning government.
- Owing in part to differing degrees of state ownership across the economy, levels of regulation in services vary considerably by sector. According to the OECD, Norway compares favourably in terms of legal, accounting and rail freight transport services, but there are fairly high barriers to competition in insurance, air transport, road freight and construction. While scope for private enterprise in a number of product and services markets is restricted, the bureaucratic burden for companies operating in Norway is generally low. Administrative processes involved in establishing a new business, payment of taxes, crossborder trading, contract enforcement and the process of insolvency compare favourably with most advanced economies, with some room for improvement in accessing utilities and credit (mostly among small and medium-sized enterprises).

State involvement has risen since 2020 and will remain a prominent feature
- Most state-backed pandemic-support measures-which have included loan-guarantee and credit-insurance schemes for businesses; a wage-subsidy furlough scheme; tax deferrals and revised petroleum tax rules; a government bond fund; and sector-specific direct grants for companies-are temporary in design, being wound down as and when it is deemed appropriate given economic conditions. However, their expansive scope, a need for ongoing targeted measures to address the imbalanced fallout from the pandemic, recently tightened foreign investment screening rules, a global drift towards protectionism and "industrial sovereignty" and a leftward policy shift under the new government (with a likely strengthening of the welfare system, revised industrial and climate strategies, and a halt to any privatisation) imply that state involvement will be a more prominent feature of the business environment in the coming years.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.7 8.7 10 6 8 2
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The category score is unchanged, but Norway sees a relative improvement in its global and regional rankings, mostly driven by a more protectionist policy stance in some EU countries towards foreign takeovers and non-EU investment (from China primarily) in "strategic" sectors. Given its small economy, Norway has long adopted a broadly welcoming approach to inward investment, albeit with access to certain markets constrained by the relatively high level of state ownership. Mirroring global trends, political and public resistance to foreign influence is on the rise, but specific restrictions on foreign ownership are fairly limited, applying mainly to parts of strategic industries (such as fisheries, maritime and transport) and natural resources. The gradual long-term depletion of offshore hydrocarbon reserves, recent volatile swings in oil prices and increasing public consciousness of climate change issues have given some impetus to efforts to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) as a means of diversifying the economy and complementing the offshore sector with new sources of wealth. Focus areas for Invest in Norway (the official investment promotion agency) include renewable energy, "cleantech", biotechnology and a growing professional services sector, especially ICT. There have been advances, but overall progress on diversification has been modest, with the hydrocarbon sector still among the most appealing to foreign investors. Norway does not offer significant tax benefits to investors (domestic or foreign), but selective start-up grants and R&D support are available, with additional incentives for projects in less populated areas of the country.
National security will play a larger role in foreign investment decisions
- Norway adopted a new investment screening regime in 2019, giving the authorities greater powers to investigate and block foreign acquisitions (from EU and non-EU investors) on the grounds of national security, national financial stability and autonomy. Most EU member states are now following suit, either strengthening or implementing screening mechanisms for non-EU investment and tightening regulations on prospective foreign takeovers, after adoption of a new EU framework for screening FDI in October 2020. This reflects heightened regional concerns in recent years at the increasing involvement of state-backed foreign actors (mainly in China and the Middle East) in EU infrastructure assets, the transfer of intellectual property and fears of a pandemic-driven spike in non-EU acquisitions of European companies. This regional pushback against non-EU investments and inflows (particularly from China) has potential implications for Norway, which is seeking to finalise a free-trade agreement (FTA) with China, has seen increased involvement by Chinese firms in transport infrastructure projects and has placed greater emphasis on attracting FDI from a more diversified range of countries such as China, other parts of Asia and the US.
- In 2018 a British transport provider, Go-Ahead, won the first competitive tender for Norway's rail operations, covering the Sorlandet line to Stavanger and Arendal line services for a ten-year period. In 2019 a Swedish operator, SJ, won the rights to an additional seven routes. The outgoing centre-right government had earmarked a gradual expansion of public-private collaboration in Norwegian infrastructure, including the rail network, in line with its medium-term transport strategy (2018-29), but following the September 2021 parliamentary election it is unclear if these plans will proceed under a new left-leaning coalition.
- Foreign and domestic investors receive equal treatment in the awarding of new blocks for exploration and production of oil and gas, based on annual licensing rounds that cover more mature parts of the shelf (awards in predefined areas, APAs) and licensing rounds held every two years for more risky frontier areas. An expected, new left-leaning government following the September election-amid a growing focus on climate and environmental issues by voters-implies a less supportive policy stance for the oil and gas sector over the coming years than has traditionally been the case. A major near-term shift is unlikely, given the economy's still high reliance on oil sector revenue and employment, but revised policies could include a gradual tightening of rules on exploration and reduced support for foreign investment on the Norwegian continental shelf.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
9.1 8.7 14 22 8 13
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Energy exports comprise the bulk of Norway's trade in Europe As Norway is a net energy exporter with a small domestic market and limited manufacturing capacity, governments have adopted broadly pro-free-trade policies, despite a longstanding reluctance to join the EU and the protectionism afforded to home-produced agriculture. The deterioration in the country's score and rankings in the forecast period reflects the expected limited progress in diversifying Norway's export base and a likely worsening of global trading conditions, amid increased protectionism, tightened FDI screening and tense US-China bilateral relations. Trade openness notwithstanding, Norway's institutions are largely welcoming to foreign trade. Profits and dividends earned in all sectors may be repatriated, with no restrictions on capital flows. Through the country's membership of the EEA, domestic and foreign-owned companies in Norway have full access to the single market, which accounts for around 60% of Norwegian exports. EU access provides for free movement of persons, goods, services and capital between Norway and member states. Norway has adopted about three-quarters of single-market legislation, with notable exceptions being laws that govern agriculture and fisheries (the fisheries industry is among the largest in Europe). Trading outside the EU is promoted mainly through FTAs concluded by the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), which comprises Switzerland, Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein. As at August 2021 there were 29 FTAs covering 41 countries, with talks ongoing over future deals with India, Malaysia, Thailand and Mercosur (the South American trading bloc), among others. Negotiations since 2016 on a bilateral Norway-China FTA have made some progress and an agreement is possible in the forecast period. Norway followed the EU's lead in placing sanctions on Russia since 2014, resulting in a Russian ban on EU (and Norwegian) food imports.
Norway is unlikely to renegotiate the terms of its EEA membership
- Norway's position on the fringe of European institutions is unlikely to change. It is not a member of the EU and will not consider joining in the forecast period, amid strong opposition from a number of political parties and mixed support from voters. There have been recent calls by the far-right Progress Party and the Centre Party to renegotiate the terms of Norway's EEA membership, but this remains an unlikely prospect, with a majority in parliament supportive of the existing arrangement and in view of the UK's tortuous Brexit process.
- Norway's export sector will benefit from a rebound in world trade flows and commodity prices in 2021-22. However, this will be tempered by significant disruption to global supply chains, ongoing coronavirus-related caution and relatively modest external demand overall, which will contribute to an uneven recovery. The fallout from the pandemic will exacerbate existing geopolitical trends such as rising protectionism and shifting economic power from West to East. This could spur more regionalised nearshoring of supply chains, although Asia (primarily China) will remain a key source of import components.
- There is a clear risk that EU-China tensions could rise, fuelled by disputes related to unfair competition, concerns over strategic sectors and human rights issues. An updated EU industrial strategy in May 2021 included proposals to reduce dependence on China and other foreign suppliers in areas such as technology products and pharmaceuticals. This could hinder efforts by Norway to conclude an FTA with China, and place the government in a tricky position in balancing relations with both the EU and China.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.0 7.4 45 23 12 6
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Recent reforms have involved a shift from direct to indirect taxation The tax regime has traditionally been one of the weaker aspects of the business environment, but the impact of reforms in recent years has improved Norway's relative standing at a global and regional level. The focus has been on measures aimed at encouraging labour participation and private investment via shifting some of the overall tax burden from direct to indirect taxation. This has included cuts to personal and corporate income tax rates, new levies on some financial activities and high-sugar products, changes in excise duties, and a rise in carbon tax. Over recent years Norway's tax/GDP ratio has been fairly stable at about 40%-similar to the EU average and slightly lower than its Nordic peers. The share of total tax receipts from personal and corporate income taxes and social security contributions remains moderately higher than the EU average, whereas the combined share of revenue from taxes on property, energy and other indirect taxes-excluding value-added tax (VAT)-is below average.

- Between 2014 and 2019 the headline corporation tax rate was cut from 27% to the current 22%, which is close to effective tax rates among Norway's regional peers and broadly on a par with the OECD average. Additional corporate income tax rates are levied on offshore petroleum firms (56% in 2020) and hydropower production (37%). These headline rates have risen moderately in recent years, but effective tax rates in the energy sector have been largely stable, as the tax rate of investment-based depreciation-the "rate of uplift"-has been gradually lowered. In mid-2020, amid heightened market uncertainty and a pandemic-driven slump in oil demand and prices, the then centre-right government introduced temporary changes to elements of the petroleum tax system covering depreciation, uplift and treatment of tax losses, with the aim of encouraging continued investment and exploration activity. These relief measures apply to all 2020-21 investments and pre-production investments approved before January 2024.
- The income tax system for individuals was reformed in 2016, with a progressive four-tier framework replacing a surtax that was levied only on the highest earners. This has been accompanied in recent years by a reduction in the flat tax rate levied on all net income, from 27% to the current 22%, increases in the personal allowance, some reductions in wealth-related taxes and a tightening of various exemptions. As at January 2021 the four additional income tax rates ranged from 1.7% to 16.2%. VAT is levied at a standard rate of 25%, although reduced rates of 15%, 12% (temporarily cut to 6% between April 2020 and October 2021) and 0% apply to a wide range of goods and services.
- Tax policy is likely to be a focus for the incoming left-of-centre government. Norway compares reasonably well in global terms on most measures of income and wealth equality, but as in most countries imbalances have steadily widened and rising inequality was a prominent election topic. No dramatic near-term tax shift is expected, and the scale and timing of any measures will be influenced by virus developments and the global oil price, but changes are likely to include tax cuts for low- and middle-income earners and higher taxes levied on the wealthy and some businesses. Other possible reforms could include a withholding tax on interest and royalty payments, a broadening of the VAT base, a tightening of generous housing tax incentives and slightly reduced incentives in the oil and gas sector. A multi-year rise and broadening of the carbon tax (proposed in early 2021 by the outgoing centre-right government) is also likely to be implemented.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.5 9.3 3 1 1 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The financing environment is robust, but some risks to stability will pesist Financing conditions for business will remain favourable, with Norway heading the rankings at a regional and global level. This reflects the underlying resilience of its banking sector, comparatively modest risk exposure, access to a range of financing channels and recent improvements to the regulatory framework. Before the pandemic, annual stress tests showed the banking sector to be more profitable than most regional peers, with strong capital and liquidity buffers (in 2020 the ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk weighted assets was 22%, according to the IMF, far above minimum regulatory capital requirements), comparatively modest costs, and low levels of credit losses and non-performing loans. Risks to financial stability mainly stem from banks' exposure to the oil and gas sector, overvalued domestic housing and commercial real estate markets, and elevated levels of household debt. Banks remain more reliant on wholesale funding than in many peer economies, reflecting the limited scope to expand the deposit base. This implies some liquidity risk via exposure to global market trends, although the maturity of this funding has lengthened in recent years. The tightly integrated nature of the Nordic-Baltic banking system implies a moderate spillover risk. Since late 2018 revelations of a major money laundering scandal involving some of the largest Nordic-Baltic banking groups have prompted a tightening of anti-money laundering and terrorism financing legislation across the region.

- Domestic policymakers have deployed a wide range of financing support measures during the pandemic. These have included cuts in the policy interest rate, expanded swap facilities to bolster liquidity, loan-guarantee schemes, loan-repayment deferrals, a cut in banks' countercyclical capital buffer rate, and the temporary relaxation of mortgage lending rules and banks' capital and liquidity requirements. Market rates have remained low and in aggregate terms corporate bank deposits have risen over the past year. This implies a low risk of financial-market volatility triggering a credit squeeze, but pressure on bank balance sheets from a lagged rise in bankruptcies and loan defaults-and a possible correction in real estate markets-as support is wound down could lead to a moderate tightening of lending conditions.
- Prior to the pandemic, a number of new macroprudential measures were introduced with the aim of strengthening capital buffers and tightening rules on consumer credit and higher-risk mortgage lending (particularly in larger cities such as the capital, Oslo). These contributed to somewhat softer growth in bank lending and house prices, although some underlying vulnerabilities persisted. As in many countries, house-price inflation in Norway has accelerated during the pandemic, spurred in part by the crisis-related temporary relaxation of borrower-focused requirements. An expected gradual tightening of interest rates and normalisation of other policy tools are likely to cool housing market activity and contain related balance-sheet risks, although additional regulatory measures could be needed.
- Foreign companies have access to the same capital sources as domestic companies, but often work through foreign banks, which tend to have offices in Oslo and in cities where the oil industry is based, especially Bergen and Stavanger. Demand for (and supply of) venture capital and private equity have strengthened over recent years and we expect a further expansion of these alternative financing channels.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.6 6.7 26 30 11 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Norway's score and rankings for the labour market over the forecast period remain around the regional average. The labour force is productive and highly educated (on average), with a strong level of technical and language skills. An employment rate of around 75% is above EU and OECD averages, but trails a number of regional peers, implying some scope for raising participation. There is a comparatively high level of unionisation and a highly centralised system of collective bargaining between government, the Confederation of Norwegian Enterprise and the Norwegian Confederation of Trade Unions. This involves a high degree of co-ordination, with blue-collar manufacturing wages providing the benchmark for sector-specific and company-level bargaining. Median wage levels are elevated, but there are notable regional and sectoral variations (which have been intensified by the pandemic). The cost of living is among the highest in the world. Strike action can be a feature of the wage-bargaining process in the large public sector and offshore petroleum industry, which has led to occasional industrial action over recent years. However, the government reserves the right to enforce arbitration in disputes that are likely to have a major impact on the economy or be detrimental to public health. Against a backdrop of tightened immigration controls, and shifting business and consumer trends, concerns over skills mismatches rose gradually before the pandemic, and are likely to become more evident over the coming years.

- Damage to the labour market during the pandemic has been mitigated by extensive policy measures, including a short-time wage-subsidy scheme (as in many countries), expanded welfare benefits and grants in badly hit sectors. Unemployment initially surged from around 3.5% in early 2020 to a peak of 5.3% in August 2020, but had fallen back steadily to 4.8% in June 2021. Targeted training and job-search measures are likely to be an increasingly important policy tool over the coming years, as the uneven and disruptive impact of the pandemic has contributed to a more fragmented labour market, affecting certain industries and groups (young, older, migrant and lower-skilled workers) far more than others. These factors, along with pandemic-driven shifts in the economy (such as increased digitisation), are likely to aggravate skills mismatches and near-term recruitment difficulties in sectors such as healthcare, engineering, construction and ICT.
- A relative lack of labour mobility will continue to restrict opportunities for development in remote regions, and a mismatch of education and skills among immigrants and asylum-seekers settling in Norway will hamper integration into the workforce. Political pressure to restrict immigration will remain high, constraining potential labour supply growth.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.3 8.5 11 10 8 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Norway has well-developed physical transport networks and high-quality digital infrastructure, with few of the problems, such as traffic congestion, that affect countries with higher population densities. Gradual improvements to road and rail networks are scheduled over the forecast period, based on a ten-year national transport plan published in 2018. Alongside ongoing digital expansion plans, we expect a modest rise in Norway's score and rankings for infrastructure over the forecast period. Good ferry and internal air transport services, including oil-rig helicopter links, help to mitigate the logistical challenges posed by the country's diverse topography and weather-related vulnerabilities. Unpopular road tolls are an important source of funding for Norwegian infrastructure and will remain a salient political issue. Digital infrastructure is among the most highly advanced in the world, with Norway ranking among the leading countries in the European Commission's Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI). Provision and uptake of high-speed broadband services, 4G and 5G mobile coverage, rates of online business use and provision of e-government services all compare favourably at a regional level. A relatively early start to 5G auctions and the wide availability of spectrum has helped Norway to sustain momentum in its 5G network rollout.
A National Transport Plan, published in 2018, directs infrastructure spending
- Medium-term infrastructure priorities and plans could change once a new government has settled in, but in the near term at least infrastructure policy will continue to be guided by the existing National Transport Plan for 2018-29, which focuses on the maintenance and upgrading of transport infrastructure, pollution reduction, increased use of intelligent transport systems and ongoing digitisation. The plan's baseline scenario allocates 58% of a budget of Nkr418m (US$46m) for road improvements; 32% for railways (which includes new double-track lines for intercity routes, Oslo-Skien and Halden-Lillehammer, and a second light-rail line in Bergen to Fyllingsdalen, a borough in the south of the city); and another 3% to sea infrastructure to benefit the fishing and shipping industries. One area that is likely to be dialled back under an expected left-of-centre government is plans for stronger public-private co-operation on infrastructure projects.
- Telenor launched Norway's first commercial 5G mobile services in March 2020, with its main competitor, Telia, switching on its 5G network soon after. The operators target nationwide coverage by 2023, supported by allocation of increased spectrum by the National Communications Authority (Nkom) from January 2022. A new Broadband Development Act was adopted in 2020, which aims to facilitate the development of ultrafast broadband networks and 5G rollout by encouraging co-operation in infrastructure construction and promoting joint utilisation of existing networks.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.8 8.3 23 20 11 10
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
We expect gradual improvements in technological readiness over 2021-25, raising Norway's global and regional standing slightly. Stronger aspects are the quality of digital infrastructure; high adoption rates of e-commerce and e-business technology; good penetration of e-government services; widespread internet usage; and above-average digital skills levels. There is room for improvement in cyber-security preparedness, research and development (R&D) spending and the quality of the country's research infrastructure, although these are still satis-factory on a regional basis. Total investment in R&D corresponds to just over 2% of GDP-slightly below an OECD average of 2.4% and well below levels of over 3% in Denmark and Sweden. Norway ranks in the second-highest group as a "strong innovator" in the European Innovation Scoreboard, scoring particularly well for its innovation-friendly environment, strong public-private linkages and lifelong learning (aided by Norway's flexible education system). Weaker aspects include a below-average impact from sales and exports of knowledge-intensive products, implying scope for improvement in translating the country's strong innovative capacity into increased entrepreneurial activity.

- In May 2019, in response to the increasing prevalence of cyber-attacks, the government adopted a revised national cyber-security strategy. State institutions were subject to several major cyber-attacks (widely believed to be by foreign state-sponsored actors) over the first half of 2021. According to the Global Cybersecurity Index 2020, published by the International Telecommunication Union, Norway ranked 17th globally for its commitment and capacity to deal with the threat from cyber-related attacks.

There will be a focus on strengthening digital skills and e-government
- A revised national budget in mid-2020 earmarked additional funding for the Norwegian Digitalisation Agency to strengthen various digital platforms used by the public. Norway ranks highly for the use and integration of digital technology by government and businesses, but the accelerated paradigm shift towards digitisation amid the pandemic implies ongoing pressures to meet rising demand. A key focus of the new government's digital strategy is likely to be measures to bolster digital skills levels and expand the available stock of higher-skilled ICT workers.
- The National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence lays out the role 5G is expected to play in industrial use cases. The government is keen to use 5G to drive efficiency in logistics and manufacturing sectors, energy and infrastructure management, and in building smart cities.

Economic forecast: Policy trends A short-lived fourth wave of the coronavirus epidemic appears to be abating, although the threat of isolated outbreaks and new variants remains a substantial risk to the short-term outlook. Vaccination has accelerated in recent months, and the authorities had provided at least one dose to 73% of the population as at September 14th (just under 64% are fully vaccinated, above the EU average of 61%). In aggregate terms, Norway has handled the crisis the best of any European country, with total recorded deaths since March 2020 slightly lower than the previous five-year average.
Beyond the coronavirus crisis, the government is likely to refocus attention on diversifying the economy away from oil, with growth in the sector fairly subdued in recent years. Emergent industries in fishing, professional services and light manufacturing will probably receive more extensive government support under the next administration, despite the recent deterioration in the fiscal position. Divisions within the Labour Party between its youth and trade union wings over oil reimbursement allowances (which allow 70% of oil exploration costs to be reimbursed if there is no discovery) threaten to remove the tax incentives for investment in offshore oil, particularly given the likelihood that the Socialist Left Party (SV) will be part of the ruling coalition.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
General government expenditure 58.3 57.1 55.9 54.1 54.0 54.5
General government revenue 55.3 54.1 53.5 53.2 54.6 55.0
General government budget balance -3.0 -3.0 -2.5 -0.9 0.6 0.5
General government debt 46.0 51.5 53.3 54.2 54.5 54.9
Fiscal conditions are supported by the Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG), the country's US$1trn sovereign wealth fund, which has insulated the public finances from cyclical fluctuations. In the face of the crisis, Norway put together a financial assistance package. Owing to its long history of fiscal probity, Norway has a greater level of fiscal space than most, and The Economist Intelligence Unit expects public debt to remain below 60% of GDP during the 2021-25 forecast period, after rising to 46% at end-2020. Government efforts to contain this debt will only take effect from 2025 onwards.
Following a deficit of 3% of GDP in 2020 (the first since 1993), we expect the fiscal deficit to remain large in 2021, reflecting still significant expenditure. The government's fiscal rule (to cap withdrawals at 3% of the GPFG's value) will probably be broken again in 2021. However, a normalising economic climate will generate improvements in the public finances from 2022, with the deficit narrowing to 2.5% of GDP. We expect a return to fiscal surplus in 2024-25, reflecting both a moderation in expenditure and an increase in revenue. Recent emergency withdrawals from the fund will not make a significant dent in its vast size, meaning that it will continue to support the government's fiscal stance.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
3-month Nibor rate (av) 0.7 0.3 0.6 1.2 1.7 1.9
10-year government bond yield (av) 0.8 1.6 2.2 1.9 2.0 2.1
Norges Bank (the central bank) has kept its policy rate at 0%, the lowest in modern history, since May 2020 but it is likely to begin a gradual process of raising the policy rate before the end of 2021 (our baseline forecast is that this will start at the central bank's late September monetary policy committee meeting). This mainly reflects concerns about an overheating housing market, which could generate financial instability. Rising headline inflation (which reached 3.4% in August) is also likely to be a concern. However, the trajectory of future rate rises is likely to remain gradual, in order to avoid choking off the economic recovery. Norges Bank's inflation target of "close to 2% over time" means there is some latitude for the bank to keep rates low while the economy recovers, even as inflation remains elevated. Moreover, we see much of the recent inflationary surge as transitory, largely tied to rising electricity and energy prices, alongside base effects from the onset of the pandemic. As a result, we expect interest rates to reach just 1.5% in 2025, still below their pre-crisis peak of 1.6%.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Economic growth (%)
US GDP -3.5 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.1
OECD GDP -4.8 4.9 3.8 2.2 2.0 2.0
EU27 GDP -6.2 4.4 4.3 2.5 2.1 1.9
World GDP -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
World trade -8.1 8.9 5.7 4.8 4.3 4.1
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
OECD CPI 1.2 3.0 2.3 2.1 2.0 2.1
EU27 CPI 0.6 2.1 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8
Manufactures (measured in US$) 0.2 7.6 1.8 1.5 2.0 2.5
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 2.9 32.0 -1.6 -0.7 -8.7 -0.1
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6
€ 3-month interbank rate (av; %) -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3
Nkr:US$ (av) 9.4 8.6 8.4 8.6 8.8 8.9
US$:€ (av) 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP -1.3 3.0 2.9 2.5 2.1 2.0
Private consumption -7.3 4.4 4.1 2.2 2.4 1.8
Government consumption 1.7 2.0 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.6
Gross fixed investment -3.8 1.7 2.9 2.1 2.0 2.2
Exports of goods & services -0.8 4.2 4.3 5.4 3.3 3.1
Imports of goods & services -12.0 5.1 5.3 4.6 3.6 3.0
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -1.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Domestic demand -5.2 3.2 3.1 2.0 2.1 1.9
Agriculture 0.2 1.8 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.4
Industry 3.8 4.0 2.5 2.1 2.1 2.1
Services -3.1 2.4 3.1 2.8 2.2 2.0
After a real GDP decline of 1.3% in 2020, we expect headline output to grow by 3% in 2021 as consumer and business confidence returns and international trade recovers. However, the economic shock from the pandemic will have persistent effects throughout the forecast period, with unemployment peaking at 4.9% on average in 2021 and remaining above pre-crisis levels until 2023, holding back nominal wage growth.
The recovery in 2021 will be driven by consumer spending and export growth, which we expect to grow by 4.4% and 4.2%, respectively. For the mainland economy, the gradual lifting of uncertainty as the year progresses will boost fixed investment, but this will remain fairly subdued, growing at just 1.7%. The unwinding of restrictions in neighbouring countries, alongside the recovery in global trade, will boost the growth of non-oil exports and encourage industrial activity. Growth in offshore activity will probably remain tepid compared with 2020, as fewer major fields will come on stream.
We expect the economy to recover to its pre-crisis size by the end of 2021 as domestic and external demand gather pace, which will provide momentum going into 2022. With fixed investment strengthening and private consumption growth remaining firm, overall real GDP will register another strong result, with growth close to 3%. As the impact of pent-up domestic and external demand eases in the medium term, we forecast more moderate growth of an average 2.2% per year in 2023-25.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends Norway's sectoral balance has changed only slightly over the past decade, with services accounting for a gradually rising share of output, while the influence of the manufacturing and the oil and gas sectors has slowly declined. As in most developed economies, the services sector is the mainstay of Norwegian output, accounting for 62% of GDP in 2020. However, this is a lower share than in most western Europe economies, including Sweden (67%), Finland (70%) and Denmark (74%). This largely reflects the role of the oil and gas industry in Norway. While its relative importance is gradually diminishing, it still accounted for over 10% of GDP in 2020. The manufacturing industry comprised a fairly modest 7% share, similar in scale to the construction sector, although the latter is on a gradually rising trend. Agriculture accounted for just over 2% of GDP.
The oil and gas sector has been the primary driver of economic development since Norwegian oil was first exploited in the 1970s. Early phases of exploration took place in the North Sea (on the country's west coast), but later efforts have also concentrated on the Barents Sea (to the north). The influence of the oil and gas sector (as a share of GDP) has declined steadily in recent decades, from around 30% in the early 2000s, amid growth of the services sector, volatile oil prices, disrupted production on major (and in some cases ageing) oil platforms and shifting environmental pressures. However, after falls in output in 2018-19, oil and gas production rose in 2020, despite slumping commodity demand and prices amid the pandemic, and official forecasts from the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD), a government agency, point to continued growth in output to 2025. This is partly attributable to the reactivation of several oil platforms after maintenance operations, but the main factor behind the jump in production is the giant Johan Sverdrup field, which came on stream in late 2019. It is the fifth-largest oil discovery ever made in Norwegian waters and will account for 30% of all Norwegian oil production by the mid-2020s, according to the NPD.
As at end-2020, a total of 90 fields were producing, up from 83 in 2018. Supported by a temporary tax break in mid-2020, sectoral investment and exploration activity have been resilient during the pandemic, which is expected to lead to other new fields coming on stream over the forecast period, offsetting reduced ouput from ageing fields. This revival in offshore activity is likely to raise production to a decade-high level by 2024-25, although it will remain below the peak in the early 2000s. The indeterminate path of the pandemic nevertheless implies a greater than ususal degree of uncertainty over future oil demand and oil prices, which could influence investment and exploration activity in the coming years. The broader role of the oil and gas sector in the Norwegian economy faces growing scrutiny amid climate change, societal shifts, "net zero" emissions targets and the gradual diversification of global energy demand away from oil and gas. Climate and environmental issues dominated Norway's 2021 election campaign and with a majority left-leaning coalition expected to enter office, energy and tax policies are likely to lead to a gradual reduction in support for the oil and gas sector. Amid some calls for an immediate end to exploration on the Norwegian continental shelf, most political parties and the public remain broadly aligned in the view that the focus should be to "develop rather than discontinue" the industry, given the economy's still high dependence on petroleum sector revenue. The direction of travel is clear, however, with the influence of the sector on the Norwegian economy set to decline gradually over the medium term.
Since the exploitation of oil, Norway's manufacturing sector has diminished in economic importance, from an 18% share of GDP in 1970 to about 7% in 2020. The trend over the past decade has been one of gradual decline, from just below 8% in the late 2000s. Manufacturing is split between an oil-oriented component dominated by machinery, chemicals and ship-building, and a consumer-oriented component of which the largest is production of food and beverages. The sector is highly capital intensive, with activity having rebounded since mid-2020 more quickly than most services sectors, amid a recovery in global trade and being less exposed to pandemic-related restrictions. Momentum slowed over the first half of 2021, hampered in part by supply-chain disruptions such as the global semiconductor chip shortage and rising freight costs, which will extend well into 2022. Non-oil manufacturing may receive targeted support in the coming years as part of a broader economic diversification strategy. The comparative strength of the krone will, however, continue to pose a challenge to efforts to boost the global share of manufacturing exports.
Norway's well diversified services sector showed resilience during the pandemic In the services sector, government and public administration account for the largest share of activity and employment, reflecting in part high-quality and extensive healthcare, education and social welfare structures. Wholesale and retail trade, business services, financial services, real estate, and information and communications technology (ICT) all make a sizeable contribution to services value added. Much of the sector services the internal market, but there are many service industries that have developed a significant advantage compared with their European and global competitors. Given Norway's geographical location and the influence of the oil and gas industry, these tend to be firms specialising in logistics or research and development.
Partnership with the oil sector has enabled transport and maritime services, alongside other professional or technical services (such as engineering, chemicals and research), to develop outside the oil sector. Business services, ICT and wholesale and retail trade have been among the main growth drivers in recent years, and have remained fairly resilient throughout the pandemic. In contrast, activity in contact-intensive services such as hospitality, tourism, entertainment and arts was severely curtailed in 2020 and early 2021. However, the relative importance of these sectors to the Norwegian economy is smaller than in many peer countries, limiting the overall fallout.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Consumer prices 1.3 3.0 2.6 1.9 1.8 1.8
Average wages 1.9 3.1 2.9 2.2 2.3 2.3
Real wages 0.6 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.5
Unit labour costs -2.4 8.8 4.0 -1.8 -1.5 0.1
Labour costs per hour (US$) 47.7 53.9 56.5 56.2 56.1 57.0
Headline inflation has surged since its nadir of 0.7% in November 2020, to 3.4% in August. However, we expect much of this surge to be transitory, as it is linked to limited supply bottlenecks and higher global commodity prices, which have raised utility prices and fuel costs. As a result, inflation by Norges Bank's preferred measure, excluding energy prices and taxation, has been declining since August 2020, falling from 3.7% to 0.9% in August 2021. Although a more widespread uptick in inflation remains a possibility, particularly given the recent rise in producer price inflation (which surged to more than 50% year on year in August), we expect that inflation will start to decline from 2022. After averaging 3% in 2021, we expect inflation to fall to 2.6% in 2022. We expect falling energy prices to support further declines to an average of 1.8% in 2023-25.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Exchange rate Nkr:US$ (av) 9.42 8.59 8.40 8.62 8.81 8.86
Exchange rate Nkr:US$ (end-period) 8.58 8.73 8.43 8.64 8.78 8.86
Exchange rate Nkr:€ (av) 10.75 10.25 9.83 9.89 10.36 10.77
Real effective exchange-rate index (2010=100; av) 78.2 82.1 85.4 83.8 80.3 77.8
Purchasing power parity Nkr:US$ (av) 10.03 10.41 10.47 10.35 10.10 9.90
The krone has largely followed the changes in global energy markets since January 2020, experiencing a substantial devaluation throughout 2020 before strengthening in 2021 as oil prices have risen and economic conditions have started to normalise. We forecast that the krone's real effective exchange rate will appreciate by 5% in 2021-owing to the rapid revival of oil prices-after a depreciation of 6.6% in 2020, before further real appreciation in 2022. In 2023-25 we expect the real effective exchange rate to depreciate by 3.1% on average as global oil prices weaken and the euro strengthens (owing to the European Central Bank's unwinding of its asset-purchase programme). Further downward shifts in oil prices, chiefly from further shocks to global demand, remain a risk to our exchange-rate forecast.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Current-account balance 7.2 30.1 31.8 26.4 15.7 7.6
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.0 6.9 6.8 5.6 3.3 1.6
Goods: exports fob 82.3 127.3 135.0 135.8 134.2 134.8
Goods: imports fob -82.3 -95.6 -103.1 -111.0 -118.3 -127.8
Trade balance -0.1 31.7 31.9 24.8 16.0 7.0
Services: credit 35.5 34.6 34.1 37.6 37.7 41.8
Services: debit -37.0 -42.8 -45.4 -47.3 -50.5 -53.9
Services balance -1.4 -8.1 -11.4 -9.8 -12.8 -12.1
Primary income: credit 38.4 40.4 52.7 59.1 54.1 57.8
Primary income: debit -22.2 -27.6 -35.0 -41.2 -35.1 -38.5
Primary income balance 16.2 12.8 17.6 17.9 19.1 19.3
Secondary income: credit 5.5 4.7 5.1 5.2 5.2 5.2
Secondary income: debit -13.0 -11.0 -11.6 -11.7 -11.7 -11.8
Secondary income balance -7.5 -6.3 -6.4 -6.5 -6.5 -6.6
Norway's current-account surpluses are historically supported by large inflows on the trade and primary income accounts, reflecting the economy's position as a major oil exporter and the size of the GPFG, respectively. Nominal oil exports will experience a sharp rebound in 2021, lifting the trade surplus and offsetting a rise in goods imports following the revival of the mainland economy. This will be the main factor lifting the current-account surplus to 6.9% of GDP in 2021, from 2% of GDP in 2020. These trends will continue into 2022, with the current-account surplus likely to remain large. Lower commodity prices in the remainder of the forecast period combined with steady growth in imports will contribute to a moderation in the size of the current-account surplus, to 1.6% of GDP in 2025.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Norway Stocks and flows Developments in Norway's large oil and gas sector and in global energy prices are major determinants of annual inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI), which tend to be more volatile than in many peer economies. According to data from the IMF, the stock of inward FDI totalled US$255bn at the end of 2020, equivalent to 71% of GDP. Per head, the FDI stock was an estimated US$47,212, comparatively high on a regional basis and a similar level to Sweden. The strongest period of FDI inflows occurred in 2005-12, averaging US$17bn per year. Since then, inward FDI has fluctuated between positive and negative annual flows. These have generally been modest in scale, although there was a substantial disinvestment of US$19bn in 2016 and a stronger inflow of US$17bn in 2019. On average over the 2013-19 period, FDI inflows amounted to a subdued US$1.1bn per year. There was disinvestment of US$6.7bn in 2020, mirroring a global cooling of FDI activity given the elevated uncertainty and restricted mobility posed by the coronavirus pandemic.
Origin and distribution Norway's oil-intensive economy means that FDI is largely focused on the oil and gas sector, in addition to ancillary services such as transport, infrastructure and finance. Most of the world's major oil and gas companies are involved in Norwegian oil production, including Chevron, ConocoPhillips, ExxonMobil, Marathon (all US-based), BP (UK), RWE (Germany), Engie (France), Eni (Italy) and RoyalDutchShell (UK/Netherlands). According to Statistics Norway, in 2019 the mining and quarrying sector (including oil and gas) accounted for the single largest share (19%) of the FDI stock, followed by financial services (15%), manufacturing (13%), wholesale and retail trade (9%), and real estate (8%). Both manufacturing and financial services have considerable overlap with the oil and gas industry. Real estate and manufacturing accounted for the largest shares of FDI inflows in 2019. Based on unadjusted FDI data, Sweden is by some distance the single largest investor in Norway, accounting for 22% of the FDI stock in 2019, ahead of the US (10%), the Netherlands (9%), Luxembourg (8%) and Denmark (8%). However, Norway is not always the final destination of this inward investment, serving also as a pan-regional distribution hub for third-country investment. As in many countries with established financial services sectors, Norway's FDI data are also partly skewed by inflows associated with "corporate reconfigurations"-changes in complex ownership structures of multinationals-rather than greenfield investment. Based on adjusted data whereby Norway is the "ultimate destination" of FDI, the single largest investor is the US (18% of the FDI stock), followed by Sweden (12%), the UK (7%), Denmark (6%) and Finland (6%).
Determinants Aside from the potential large returns on offer to investors in the oil and gas sector, Norway offers a comparatively stable political and macroeconomic environment, a strong institutional framework, a generally low regulatory burden for firms, high-quality public services and infrastructure, a highly skilled workforce, openness to foreign investment and foreign trade, and established high value-added industry sectors. The constraint posed by Norway's small market size is partly mitigated by membership of the European Economic Area (EEA), which gives Norwegian firms access to the wider European market. However, its geographical location does imply comparatively high transport and logistics costs, while limiting the country's attractiveness as an outsourcing or re-exporting base. High labour costs (in terms of wages, payroll taxes and fairly restrictive labour regulations) will tend to deter most labour-intensive industries, while scope for private enterprise is still constrained in some product and services markets, reflecting Norway's fairly high level of direct state ownership.
Impact FDI has encouraged the transfer of foreign knowledge to Norway and accelerated the development of the oil and gas sector over recent decades. The oil sector has, in turn, encouraged wider growth in the mainland economy, through higher wages, consumer spending and investment in infrastructure and public services, as well via ancillary services such as transport and finance. Several of these ancillary services, notably the supply and maintenance services, have become internationally competitive, despite the historically strong krone. Moreover, high taxation on developed oil wells has led to a resilient fiscal balance and a vast sovereign wealth fund, the Government Pension Fund Global. Employment in the oil and gas sector has trended lower since a 2014 peak, but various estimates suggest that it still accounts (directly or indirectly) for around 150,000-200 000 people, equivalent to approximately 6% of the labour force. It can be argued that a longstanding focus on the oil and gas sector has held back investment in other industries, leaving the Norwegian economy less diversified than some of its peers and playing catch up in key sectors. A majority of non-oil inward FDI has tended to involve the acquisition by overseas interests of existing Norwegian-based companies, rather than establishing new companies or facilities. As in many countries, increased foreign investor interest over recent decades has contributed to augmented imbalances in the real estate market.
Potential Gradual diversification efforts over the forecast period are likely to provide more opportunities for FDI in Norway's growing professional services industry (finance, ICT, legal) and in areas such as fintech, "cleantech" and biotechnology. Policymakers have made the development of the "High North" (the areas adjacent to the Arctic) a wider policy priority, offering various incentives and grants, including a reduction in the scale of employer contributions, with a focus on encouraging stronger growth in the maritime, healthcare and IT sectors there. Nevertheless, the bulk of opportunities for foreign investment will remain in the energy sector, encompassing oil, gas and green energy (such as wind power). Amid an increasing global focus on climate change issues and the environment, public sentiment towards new exploration and investment in the petroleum sector is gradually shifting. This is unlikely to trigger any dramatic near-term change in official policy towards fossil-fuel production in Norway, given its revenue-raising importance for the wider economy, but could lead to a gradual tightening of tax-relief measures and other incentives in the sector, reducing its overall attractiveness for new investment. Norway's robust political, macroeconomic, financial and institutional structures will remain appealing features for potential investors, as will the quality of the labour force and infrastructure. Set against this are the country's high labour costs, small market size and a comparatively high level of direct state ownership, which is likely to persist in 2021-25.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2015 2020 2025
Population (m)
Total 5.2 5.4 5.6
 Male 2.6 2.7 2.8
 Female 2.6 2.7 2.8
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 18.1 18.0 17.7
 15-66 65.6 64.6 63.6
 67+ 16.3 17.4 18.7
Young-age dependency ratio 0.28 0.28 0.28
Old-age dependency ratio 0.25 0.27 0.29
Working-age population (m) 3.4 3.5 3.6
Urbanisation (% of total) 81.1 83.0 85.0
Labour force (m) 2.8 2.8 2.9
       
Period averages   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth (%)   0.7 0.8
Working-age population growth (%)   0.4 0.5
Labour force growth (%)   0.5 0.3
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   11.4 11.1
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   8.1 7.9
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   2.5 2.5
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   79.9 80.7
 Female   84.0 84.5
 Average   81.9 82.6
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; Economist Intelligence Unit estimates and forecasts; National statistics.
Population growth has slowed recently, but will remain positive in 2021-25 The population of Norway totalled 5.4m at end-2020, up from 4.9m in 2010 and 4.5m in 2000. Population growth averaged 1.2% per year in 2011-15, but has since moderated, averaging 0.7% per year in 2016-20. This slowdown has mainly been in response to reduced net immigration, alongside a gradual fall in the "natural increase" (annual births minus deaths). The Economist Intelligence Unit expects a mild acceleration in population growth over the forecast period (2021-25) as global economic conditions improve and as international travel normalises. A gradual ageing of the population will continue, amid a slowly declining fertility rate and increasing life expectancy.
Annual net immigration was fairly stable throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, averaging about 12,000 per year. Net inflows increased sharply from 2005 to a peak of 47,000 per year in 2011-12. Since then, net immigration has fallen steadily in response to domestic economic conditions; shifting regional migration trends; hardening public sentiment that has driven a tightening of immigration rules in Norway for those outside the European Economic Area (EEA); and most recently the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. In 2020 net immigration totalled 11,327, down from 25,327 in 2019 and the lowest level since 2003, according to Statistics Norway. Natural increase (of 12,368) contributed more than net immigration to total population growth in 2020, for the first time since 2004. In the capital, Oslo, the net migrant inflow numbered below 1,000 for the first time since 2000. Including internal migration (moves within Norway), the capital observed a negative net migration of 1,800.
There were just over 600,000 foreign citizens in Norway in 2020, equivalent to 11% of the total population. Polish migrants accounted for the largest share, with a population of 110,000, followed by Lithuanians (47,900), Swedes (43,500) and Syrians (32,800).
The fertility rate in Norway edged higher during the 2000s, but has fallen steadily over the past decade from a peak of 1.98 in 2009. The fertility rate in 2020 fell to 1.49, the lowest level ever registered by Statistics Norway. This downward trend reflects in part a sharp decline in births by women in the 20-30 age group. With life expectancy increasing, the overall population will continue to age gradually over the forecast period. The share of the population aged 67 or over is projected to rise to 18.7% in 2025, from 16.3% in 2015. The share of the working-age (15-66) population peaked at 66% in 2009; since then it has gradually declined. The size of the working-age population is forecast to increase at a modest rate over the coming years, supported by net immigration. However, its share of the total population will maintain its downward trend, falling to 63.6% by 2025.
The demographic challenge is not as severe as in other European countries Norway's population is not ageing quite as rapidly as in some EU countries, but its upward direction nevertheless implies steadily increasing pressures on the public finances, with older citizens requiring more state support in the form of pensions, health and social care. Reforms aimed at bolstering the sustainability of the pension system via flexible retirement ages (from 62 to 75), adjustments for life expectancy and less generous indexation have been implemented since the early 2000s. Further changes are likely over the forecast period, with a focus on disincentivising early retire-ment. Healthcare expenditure will continue to rise steadily, along with the median age of the population. Greater fiscal burdens will also be placed on local and municipal government, as the burden of social care for the aged, in the form of live-in helpers or retirement homes, will also steadily increase as the average age of the population rises.
Owing to Norway's unique geography, with a long coastline and separated settlements, rural areas are far more dispersed than in many other European countries, raising the cost of services provision for isolated communities. This is aggravated by an increasingly concentrated population as a whole, with 82.3% of Norway's population living in urban areas in 2020. Areas in the far north of Norway are remote and underpopulated; Finnmark, the northernmost region, has a population of 76,000 dispersed across 48,600 square kilometres. The cost of maintaining public service provision in rural areas was a driver behind the "municipal reform" implemented by the Conservatives-led government in 2020.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Population (m) 5.4 5.4 5.5 5.5 5.6 5.6
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 361.2 433.1 467.6 473.6 471.5 477.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 67,075 79,771 85,418 85,796 84,690 85,087
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 339.3 357.1 375.3 394.5 411.3 427.7
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 63,012 65,772 68,564 71,455 73,890 76,193
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 177.5 199.8 213.6 216.3 218.5 224.2
Median household income (US$) 72,216 85,140 90,874 90,125 91,241 92,910
Household consumption (US$ bn) 159.0 188.2 206.9 214.2 217.5 223.2
Household consumption per head (US$) 29,530 34,670 37,800 38,800 39,080 39,770
Exports of goods & services (% change) -0.8 4.2 4.3 5.4 3.3 3.1
Imports of goods & services (% change) -12.0 5.1 5.3 4.6 3.6 3.0
Norway will remain one of the world's wealthiest countries Norway is one of the richest countries in the world, with elevated levels of GDP per head and median household income. Market opportunities are constrained, however, by the comparatively small size of the domestic market, its geographical location and high operating costs. In terms of GDP per head (at market exchange rates), Norway ranked fourth in the world in 2020, at around US$67,100, behind only Luxembourg, Switzerland and Ireland. Measures at purchasing power parity (PPP), adjusting for different price levels between countries that are not always captured by market exchange rates, Norway ranked sixth, behind also Singapore and Qatar. The country's population of 5.4m is among the smallest in western Europe, just above that of Ireland and marginally lower than in Denmark and Finland. In terms of market size, nominal GDP of US$361bn in 2020 was about one-third larger than in Finland and Portugal and similar in scale to Denmark, accounting for a modest 0.4% of global GDP. Estimates of the distribution of household income (such as the Gini index) point to a comparatively low level of inequality in Norway, reflecting relatively high rates of marginal taxation and redistribution, alongside high levels of trust and co-operation within its society.
Norway's consumer goods market is modest in size, similar to those of Denmark and Portugal and about one-tenth that of the UK. Household consumption per head (at US$29,530 in 2020) is among the highest in western Europe and above all its Nordic peers. Norway's share of private consumption in total GDP is lower than in most west European economies, mainly owing to a large public sector. In 2020 household consumption accounted for 44% of GDP, well below that of the UK (61%), Italy (58%), France (53%), Finland (51%) and Germany (51%), slightly lower than in Denmark (45%) and a similar share as Sweden. Real consumption growth averaged 3% per year in 2010-15, moderating to 1.7% per year in 2016-19. The pandemic triggered a slump in consumer spending in 2020, but also a spike in household savings. A partial drawdown of this savings glut will support firm consumer activity in 2021-22 and will continue to provide more modest support for private spending growth thereafter. In 2025 household consumption per head is forecast at US$39,770, with GDP per head at US$85,087 at market exchange rates.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 25,889 30,207 32,468 33,107 33,042 33,537
Housing & household fuels 36,790 42,327 45,571 46,643 46,808 47,486
Clothing & footwear 7,282 8,454 9,008 8,959 8,969 9,081
Household goods & services 9,592 11,202 11,964 11,960 12,041 12,297
Health 5,155 6,046 6,651 6,947 7,111 7,356
Transport & communications 27,780 33,060 36,659 38,312 39,201 39,335
Leisure & education 18,747 22,360 24,196 25,244 25,344 26,223
Hotels & restaurants 11,376 13,135 14,618 15,052 15,203 15,750
Other 16,370 21,399 25,774 27,975 29,821 32,147
Total 158,980 188,190 206,909 214,198 217,539 223,214
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 16.3 16.1 15.7 15.5 15.2 15.0
Housing & household fuels 23.1 22.5 22.0 21.8 21.5 21.3
Clothing & footwear 4.6 4.5 4.4 4.2 4.1 4.1
Household goods & services 6.0 6.0 5.8 5.6 5.5 5.5
Health 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.3 3.3
Transport & communications 17.5 17.6 17.7 17.9 18.0 17.6
Leisure & education 11.8 11.9 11.7 11.8 11.7 11.7
Hotels & restaurants 7.2 7.0 7.1 7.0 7.0 7.1
Other 10.3 11.4 12.5 13.1 13.7 14.4
The dominance of the oil sector prevents substantial diversification Most consumer durables markets are relatively open to competition, with many small, medium-sized and niche players competing. As the extent of domestic manufacturing is limited, the bulk of consumer goods are imported. Elevated labour costs are one of the main disadvantages for firms operating in Norway, being among the highest in Europe. Geographically the country is connected to few of its major export markets (except Sweden) by land, restricting its scope as a major business or commercial hub for the rest of Europe. The dominance of the oil sector, on both skilled labour and the currency, also serves to constrain efforts to diversify the economy into other industries, as has been achieved in neighbouring Sweden and Denmark.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2020   2025  
  Norway Western Europe (av) Norway Western Europe (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 11.3 11.2 10.7 10.9
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 7,612 4,602 9,532 5,987
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 2.5 3.4 2.5 3.3
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 5.0 4.0 5.6 4.1
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 16.3 19.5 15.0 18.4
Meat consumption (kg per person) 77.3 86.5 84.5 94.6
Milk consumption (litres per person) 257.0 258.0 260.0 276.0
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 9.4 6.1 10.4 6.5
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 520 552 531 560
Telephone main lines 54 406 39 372
Mobile phone subscribers 1,080 1,210 1,050 1,260
Television sets 1,291 823 1,354 908
Personal computers 966 833 989 864
Households
No. of households (m) 2,324.0 191,390.0 2,411.0 199,310.0
No. of people per household (av) 2.3 2.2 2.3 2.1
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 72,220 49,770 92,910 58,080
Average monthly wage (US$) 5,230 3,860 6,240 4,670
Gini index 27.6 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; Pyramid Research; Economist Intelligence Unit estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population 0.81 0.58 0.66
Working-age population 0.54 0.35 0.41
Working-age minus total population -0.27 -0.24 -0.25
Labour force 0.62 0.38 0.46
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 1.2 0.8 0.9
Growth of real GDP 2.1 1.4 1.6
Labour productivity growth 1.1 1.0 1.0
Growth of capital stock 2.4 2.0 2.2
Total factor productivity growth 0.6 0.4 0.5
Initial conditions: Aided by its rich endowment of offshore oil and gas, Norway's GDP growth has outperformed that of its European neighbours over the past decade, averaging 1.2% in 2010-20, compared with a euro area average of 0.7%. With only around half of its petroleum reserves extracted to date, the country will retain its pre-eminence in European energy production throughout The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term forecast period (2021-50). However, pressures on the oil and gas sector will steadily rise as government policy becomes less accommodative and environmental concerns become more prominent in the national debate. Although participation rates in Norway are high, one long-term chall-enge for the government will be to reverse the trend among older workers to take early retirement. To this effect, the pensions system is undergoing more reform, including via a pension adjustment linked to life expec-tancy, which will be fully implemented by 2025. Technological change has increasingly supported Norwegian growth, with the application of communications and IT becoming more widespread over the past decade, supporting productivity gains. Risk factors are a slowing pace of product market reforms and the overwhelming influence of the oil sector on the economy, limiting diversification and promoting exchange-rate volatility.
Demographic trends: Norway, like many other OECD countries, faces a steadily ageing population, driven by both a socioeconomic trend towards a lower birth rate and a preference for marrying later, which have been evident since the 1960s. However, in the Norwegian case these trends have been slower to materialise, and immigration is higher than in the country's European neighbours, so Norway is in a more favourable position to face the challenges of an ageing population relative to other developed countries. Growth of the total population and the working-age population will remain positive, although the latter will ease from about 1% per year in 2000-20 to about 0.4% in 2021-50. Concurrently, the proportion of those aged 67 years or above, and the old-age dependency ratio (those 67 and over relative to those aged 15-66) will increase, leading to greater fiscal pressure on the government, which provides old age services and transfers. Further rises in the participation rate (which is already among the highest in the world) or improvements to worker productivity will be needed to maintain the social safety net.
Even taking into account the flow of oil revenue, pension liabilities will greatly exceed the expected assets of the entire Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG, the sovereign wealth fund that was created to ensure that future gen-erations would benefit from the country's oil riches). There is concern that current pension reforms do not go far enough in tackling the problems related to work incentives and the generous scale of public-sector pensions. The government will need to take further action over the coming decade to avoid a sharply rising tax burden.
Disruption from the coronavirus could undermine Norway's trading position External conditions: As a small country that is highly dependent on open markets and free trade, Norway stands to benefit from its European Economic Area (EEA) agreement, which extends the EU's single market to include it. The EU is the world's largest and most integrated regional market, and accounts for the vast majority of Norwegian exports and imports. Set against this, the EU's long-term rate of growth is likely to remain moderate. Another uncertainty over the forecast period concerns Norway's position with respect to the EU. Within the EU, although some progress will be made in advancing trade in goods and the liberalisation of trade in services, the focus-particularly in the next decade-will be on ensuring that there is no reversal of these policies. Protectionist forces will increase in the aftermath of the coronavirus outbreak, but as Norway is less well integrated into global supply chains, the fallout from this pressure will be less than in other countries. Although effort has gone into improving Norway-China economic relations, we expect collaboration to be confined to specific sectors, such as fish or oil exports, limiting effectiveness.
The sovereign wealth fund may not be adequate to guarantee pension costs Institutions and policy trends: Norway has a long democratic history and enjoys stable, democratic and transparent institutions, along with a well-entrenched justice system. Corruption is largely absent from Norwegian political and business life. The prospects for stable growth are enhanced by high levels of benefits and state-funded education, including at tertiary level, which ensures a healthy and well-educated workforce. In the long term, however, the welfare state may not be as well funded as it is currently. Norway favours free enterprise and market competition to a lesser extent than Denmark and Sweden. The state remains a significant player in many sectors, such as telecommunications, banking, energy and the offshore sector, and progress on the government's plan to reduce its stakes in some companies has been slow. Norway also lags neighbouring countries in efforts to promote competition in major product and labour markets, in part because the country's oil riches provide little incentive for policymakers to enact potentially unpopular structural reforms. Similarly, there is a risk that the existence of the GPFG will mask the need for reforms to the social security system. Ongoing pension reforms have incentives to work beyond retirement age and cut the link between pension payments and wages; these reform efforts are expected to continue in the coming years. However, government projections indicate that the assets of the pension fund will be insufficient to cover the state's liabilities arising from pensions and other demands on the public purse (such as healthcare) in the absence of further reform of both the pension system and the labour market. Measures would have to include further discouragement from taking early retirement or drawing disability benefits. (The proportion of the workforce drawing disability benefit in Norway is almost double the average for the OECD.) Ensuring the sustainability of Norway's generous welfare state will be an important challenge for future governments.
Strong investment and productivity growth will raise long term output Long-term performance: As Norway has less scope than most other developed economies to raise its labour force participation rate, its long-term economic prospects will depend on a continued high rate of investment, as well as improvements in productivity, which we expect to rise during the forecast period (to an average of 0.5% in 2021-50), having been sluggish for much of the past decade (at an average of 0.2% in 2011-20). Long-term economic performance will also depend on how successive governments meet the challenge of structural reform. Given regular large surpluses on the general government budget prior to the coronavirus pandemic, it is often easy for policymakers to ignore non-oil budget deficits. A failure to adapt social security and welfare systems to the challenge of population ageing would lead to large fiscal deficits towards the end of the long-term forecast period in 2050, which would necessitate a rising tax burden and dampen growth. This would be exacerbated should oil production fall markedly, making continued investment in exploration important.
Income and market size
  2020 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 5.4 5.8 6.6
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 361.2 548.7 981.2
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 67,070 94,020 149,670
Private consumption (US$ bn) 159.0 233.3 387.9
Private consumption per head (US$) 29,530 39,970 59,180
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 339.3 518.0 1,035.3
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 63,010 88,750 157,920
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 117.9 232.4 521.4
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 119.7 212.8 455.6
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 99.6 94.0 86.3
Share of world population (%) 0.1 0.1 0.1
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.4 0.4 0.2
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.3 0.2 0.2
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 0.5 0.5 0.4
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability The majority of Norway's emissions come from the exploitation of the country's oil and gas reserves, with aluminium production also contributing. Domestic energy usage, which is largely met through abundant hydroelectric infrastructure, is not an important contributor to Norway's carbon emissions, unlike in other advanced economies. The Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG, the sovereign wealth fund) has become more strident in its support of environmental concerns over the past few years. In 2016 two new criteria were established by the fund, making it move away from, firstly, companies with unacceptable greenhouse-gas emissions and, secondly, companies for which at least 30% of revenue is derived from thermal coal or operations based on thermal coal. In March 2019 the government established a further criterion forcing the fund to divest from upstream firms specialising in oil and gas exploration, although its holdings of generalised energy firms, including all major publicly traded oil producers, have remained.
Norway will be relatively sheltered from the impact of climate change. With a small agricultural sector and a mostly urban population, the country is easily protected from the warming planet. With the majority of economic output concentrated in the area around Oslo, the capital, and the coastal cities of Bergan, Stavanger and Trondheim, the protection of urban areas against rising sea levels and weather events will be central to Norway's strategy to mitigate the economic effects of climate change. The opening up of new areas for oil exploration in the Arctic Circle (as ice cover falls) will be an upside risk to Norwegian growth and should mitigate some costs to output.
Despite efforts by successive governments to bolster environmental policy, a substantial effort to reduce oil-related activities is unlikely, with further reform only likely to limit the sector's growth, rather than reverse it. Aided by the economic need for further diversification, political pressure is mounting from some smaller parties to curtail the oil sector's development. This division within parliament is likely to be reflected in a gradual erosion of the country's generous tax incentives for oil exploration over the long term. According to The Economist Intelligence Unit's climate change model, Norway's GDP will be only about 0.8% smaller by 2050 than it would have been in a world without climate change.
Migration and urbanisation Norway has largely adopted an accommodative policy towards migration since the late 1970s and the migrant population (including those of Norwegian birth, but with two parents born abroad) in 2020 was some 900,000, comprising approximately 17% of the country's total population. Annual net immigration was fairly stable throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, averaging about 12,000 per year. Net inflows rose sharply from 2005 to a peak of 47,000 per year in 2011-12. The bulk of these migrants came from eastern Europe after the region's transition into the EU. Since then, net immigration has fallen steadily in response to domestic economic conditions, shifting regional migration trends, hardening public sentiment that has driven a tightening of immigration rules in Norway for those outside the European Economic Area (EEA), and most recently the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. In 2020 net immigration totalled 11,327, down from 25,327 in 2019 and the lowest level since 2003, according to Statistics Norway. Polish migrants account for the largest share of the total migrant population, followed by Lithuanians and Swedes (43,500). Recent migration has increasingly come from non-European countries such as Syria, Somalia and Eritrea. These migrants have proved more politically contentious, as greater differences in cultural background and socioeconomic status have led to concerns about integration-the far-right Progress Party has included the reduction of non-European migration as part of its policy agenda. However, we expect Norway's collaborative political system to continue to adopt a reasonably accommodative stance on immigration and integration.
Norway's population has become more urbanised as the economy has developed. According to the World Bank, urbanisation rates surpassed 50% in 1960, rising rapidly over the next 20 years to 70.5% in 1980. Since then, the pace of urban growth has been more subdued, with the rate only surpassing 80% in 2013, reaching 82% 2020. Norway remains the most rural of the Scandinavian economies, with urbanisation rates in Sweden and Denmark slightly higher, at 87% and 88%, respectively. This is in part owing to Norway's large land area and long sea coast, making rural communities more isolated, but also because Norway was historically rural and underdeveloped compared with its Scandinavian peers, and so has further to catch up with its neighbours. The difficulties of paying for high standards of public service provision to an ageing and diminishing population in rural areas are putting pressure on the government to reduce costs. This was the motivation behind the "municipal reform" circulated in 2014, which will aggregate the municipal and county authorities together to encourage greater economies of scale and information-sharing in local government services.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 2.5 3.2 2.9 2.3 -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
EU27 GDP growth 2.0 2.9 2.1 1.7 -6.2 4.4 4.3 2.5 2.1 1.9
Western Europe growth 1.9 2.8 1.9 1.4 -6.2 4.6 4.3 2.3 2.0 1.9
World trade growth 2.1 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 8.9 5.7 4.8 4.3 4.1
US CPI 1.3 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
EU27 CPI 0.2 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.1 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8
Manufactures export price -2.2 1.9 5.1 -1.4 0.2 7.6 1.8 1.5 2.0 2.5
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 44.0 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3
US$:€ (av) 1.11 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
¥:€ (av) 120.4 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 130.3 130.1 128.6 132.8 135.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Expenditure on GDP (Nkr bn at current market prices)
GDP 3,089.1 3,293.6 3,566.3 3,577.5 3,401.8 3,718.6 3,929.5 4,082.4 4,155.9 4,233.7
Private consumption 1,409.9 1,474.9 1,532.1 1,589.8 1,497.4 1,616.0 1,738.8 1,846.2 1,917.6 1,978.8
Government consumption 754.7 791.1 826.2 868.2 906.0 951.7 988.6 1,021.5 1,055.5 1,091.7
Gross fixed investment 780.8 808.5 849.5 913.9 906.5 792.8 817.6 836.6 862.7 891.2
Exports of goods & services 1,095.2 1,197.4 1,351.6 1,298.8 1,110.7 1,470.3 1,540.7 1,629.6 1,659.5 1,687.9
Imports of goods & services 1,034.1 1,083.9 1,148.6 1,241.8 1,127.0 1,237.1 1,296.3 1,391.6 1,479.5 1,565.8
Stockbuilding 82.2 105.2 155.0 148.2 108.2 125.0 140.0 140.0 140.0 150.0
Domestic demand 3,027.6 3,179.7 3,362.8 3,520.1 3,418.1 3,485.5 3,685.0 3,844.3 3,975.8 4,111.6
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 367.9 398.3 438.3 406.6 361.2 433.1 467.6 473.6 471.5 477.6
Private consumption 167.9 178.4 188.3 180.7 159.0 188.2 206.9 214.2 217.5 223.2
Government consumption 89.9 95.7 101.5 98.7 96.2 110.8 117.6 118.5 119.7 123.1
Gross fixed investment 93.0 97.8 104.4 103.9 96.2 92.3 97.3 97.1 97.9 100.5
Exports of goods & services 130.4 144.8 166.1 147.6 117.9 171.2 183.3 189.1 188.3 190.4
Imports of goods & services 123.1 131.1 141.2 141.1 119.7 144.1 154.3 161.4 167.8 176.6
Stockbuilding 9.8 12.7 19.1 16.8 11.5 14.6 16.7 16.2 15.9 16.9
Domestic demand 360.5 384.6 413.3 400.0 362.9 405.9 438.5 446.0 451.0 463.8
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 45.6 44.8 43.0 44.4 44.0 43.5 44.3 45.2 46.1 46.7
Government consumption 24.4 24.0 23.2 24.3 26.6 25.6 25.2 25.0 25.4 25.8
Gross fixed investment 25.3 24.5 23.8 25.5 26.6 21.3 20.8 20.5 20.8 21.0
Stockbuilding 2.7 3.2 4.3 4.1 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.4 3.4 3.5
Exports of goods & services 35.5 36.4 37.9 36.3 32.6 39.5 39.2 39.9 39.9 39.9
Imports of goods & services 33.5 32.9 32.2 34.7 33.1 33.3 33.0 34.1 35.6 37.0
Memorandum item
National savings ratio (%) 32.0 33.2 36.1 32.6 31.8 31.6 31.2 29.5 27.5 26.2
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Real expenditure on GDP (Nkr bn at chained 2013 prices)
GDP 3,422.5 3,516.2 3,564.1 3,594.8 3,548.0 3,653.3 3,757.6 3,852.8 3,935.0 4,014.9
Private consumption 1,469.6 1,507.9 1,532.9 1,556.0 1,442.4 1,505.6 1,567.8 1,602.2 1,641.1 1,670.1
Government consumption 806.6 821.7 825.8 841.5 855.8 872.9 883.4 895.7 909.2 923.7
Gross fixed investment 810.4 831.2 849.6 890.8 856.8 871.3 896.8 915.8 934.1 954.4
Exports of goods & services 1,339.1 1,367.0 1,353.2 1,360.6 1,349.4 1,405.9 1,466.0 1,545.0 1,596.2 1,644.9
Imports of goods & services 1,106.5 1,132.5 1,149.3 1,203.1 1,058.6 1,112.6 1,171.5 1,226.0 1,270.7 1,308.4
Stockbuilding 110.2 121.3 151.6 148.6 102.0 110.0 115.0 120.0 125.0 130.0
Domestic demand 3,196.7 3,282.1 3,359.9 3,436.9 3,257.0 3,359.8 3,462.9 3,533.7 3,609.4 3,678.2
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 0.6 2.7 1.4 0.9 -1.3 3.0 2.9 2.5 2.1 2.0
Private consumption 0.9 2.6 1.7 1.5 -7.3 4.4 4.1 2.2 2.4 1.8
Government consumption 1.4 1.9 0.5 1.9 1.7 2.0 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.6
Gross fixed investment 3.8 2.6 2.2 4.8 -3.8 1.7 2.9 2.1 2.0 2.2
Exports of goods & services 0.7 2.1 -1.0 0.5 -0.8 4.2 4.3 5.4 3.3 3.1
Imports of goods & services 2.1 2.3 1.5 4.7 -12.0 5.1 5.3 4.6 3.6 3.0
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -0.4 0.3 0.9 -0.1 -1.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Domestic demand 1.3 2.7 2.4 2.3 -5.2 3.2 3.1 2.0 2.1 1.9
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 0.4 1.1 0.7 0.6 -3.2 1.8 1.7 0.9 1.0 0.7
Government consumption 0.3 0.4 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4
Gross fixed investment 0.9 0.6 0.5 1.2 -0.9 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.5
External balance -0.4 0.1 -0.9 -1.3 3.7 0.1 0.0 0.7 0.2 0.3
Memorandum items
Oil production ('000 b/d) 1,993 1,970 1,852 1,736 2,002 c 2,010 2,040 2,050 2,060 2,060
Real personal disposable income (% change) -1.7 2.0 1.0 2.4 1.7 -0.7 1.2 0.0 1.9 1.8
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimate.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Origin of GDP (Nkr bn at constant 2013 prices)
GDP at factor cost 3,059.2 3,128.1 3,161.5 3,186.5 3,167.5 3,261.5 3,354.6 3,439.7 3,513.0 3,584.3
Agriculture 63.8 66.0 66.2 69.1 69.2 70.5 71.6 72.6 73.6 74.6
Industry 1,114.9 1,152.3 1,129.9 1,106.7 1,149.1 1,195.1 1,225.0 1,250.7 1,277.0 1,303.8
Services 1,880.4 1,909.8 1,965.5 2,010.6 1,949.1 1,995.9 2,058.1 2,116.4 2,162.5 2,205.9
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture -7.3 3.4 0.4 4.4 0.2 1.8 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.4
Industry 0.7 3.4 -1.9 -2.0 3.8 4.0 2.5 2.1 2.1 2.1
Services 1.4 1.6 2.9 2.3 -3.1 2.4 3.1 2.8 2.2 2.0
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 2.4 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.0
Industry 31.6 33.6 35.7 32.5 29.4 29.2 28.2 27.2 26.3 25.4
Services 66.0 64.1 62.2 65.4 68.5 68.7 69.7 70.7 71.7 72.5
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) -1.7 2.3 1.1 -5.0 4.1 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.1
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 0.7 2.4 -0.4 -0.2 -0.8 3.3 1.0 0.8 1.1 1.3
Total factor productivity growth -0.3 1.6 -0.7 -0.8 -1.7 2.4 0.9 0.6 0.7 0.8
Growth of capital stock 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.3 2.2 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2
Growth of potential GDP 1.8 1.7 1.5 1.4 1.3 3.5 2.1 1.8 1.5 1.6
Growth of real GDP 0.6 c 2.7 c 1.4 c 0.9 c -1.3 c 3.0 2.9 2.5 2.1 2.0
Growth of real GDP per head -0.3 c 2.0 c 0.7 c 0.2 c -1.8 c 2.1 2.0 1.7 1.3 1.2
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.5 5.5 5.6 5.6
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 367.9 398.3 438.3 406.6 361.2 433.1 467.6 473.6 471.5 477.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 70,038 75,297 82,321 75,897 67,075 79,771 85,418 85,796 84,690 85,087
Private consumption (US$ bn) 167.9 178.4 188.3 180.7 159.0 188.2 206.9 214.2 217.5 223.2
Private consumption per head (US$) 31,967 33,718 35,365 33,728 29,525 34,666 37,798 38,801 39,077 39,768
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 307.6 337.8 371.6 366.4 339.3 357.1 375.3 394.5 411.3 427.7
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 58,571 63,855 69,795 68,404 63,012 65,772 68,564 71,455 73,890 76,193
Personal disposable income (Nkr bn) 1,440.1 1,497.8 1,545.7 1,617.3 1,671.8 1,715.5 1,794.9 1,864.6 1,926.2 1,987.7
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 171.5 181.1 190.0 183.8 177.5 199.8 213.6 216.3 218.5 224.2
Growth of real disposable income (%) -1.7 2.0 1.0 2.4 1.7 -0.7 1.2 0.0 1.9 1.8
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.49 0.50 0.51 0.47 0.43 0.47 0.48 0.46 0.44 0.42
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.27 0.28 0.29 0.27 0.26 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.24
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.57 0.60 0.64 0.56 0.48 0.61 0.61 0.58 0.55 0.52
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
General government expenditure 51.7 50.5 48.7 51.3 58.3 57.1 55.9 54.1 54.0 54.5
Interest -2.7 -2.6 -2.3 -2.3 -2.3 -2.1 -2.4 -2.4 -2.3 -2.1
Non-interest 54.4 53.1 51.0 53.6 60.6 59.2 58.4 56.5 56.3 56.7
General government revenue 55.8 55.5 56.5 57.9 55.3 54.1 53.5 53.2 54.6 55.0
General government budget balance 4.1 5.0 7.8 6.6 -3.0 -3.0 -2.5 -0.9 0.6 0.5
Primary balance 1.4 2.4 5.5 4.3 -5.3 -5.1 -4.9 -3.3 -1.6 -1.6
General government debt 37.3 37.8 39.0 40.1 46.0 51.5 53.3 54.2 54.5 54.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate Nkr:US$ (av) 8.40 8.27 8.14 8.80 9.42 8.59 8.40 8.62 8.81 8.86
Exchange rate Nkr:US$ (year-end) 8.61 8.18 8.65 8.78 8.58 8.73 8.43 8.64 8.78 8.86
Exchange rate Nkr:€ (av) 9.29 9.34 9.61 9.85 10.75 10.25 9.83 9.89 10.36 10.77
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.11 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
Real effective exchange rate (av; CPI-based) 84.8 85.6 86.1 83.7 78.2 82.1 85.4 83.8 80.3 77.8
Purchasing power parity Nkr:US$ (av) 10.04 9.75 9.60 9.76 10.03 10.41 10.47 10.35 10.10 9.90
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 5.1 6.0 5.3 4.2 12.1 9.5 8.5 3.2 1.6 1.3
Domestic credit growth (%) 5.3 6.5 5.2 5.4 5.4 5.4 4.6 4.1 3.6 3.2
Lending rate (av; %) 3.0 2.9 3.0 3.5 2.8 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Deposit rate (av; %) 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
3-month Nibor rate (av; %) 1.1 0.9 1.1 1.6 0.7 0.3 0.6 1.2 1.7 1.9
10-year government bond yield (av; %) 1.3 1.6 1.9 1.5 0.8 1.6 2.2 1.9 2.0 2.1
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 2.77 2.76 2.80 2.83 2.84 2.85 2.87 2.89 2.89 2.89
Labour force (% change) 0.2 -0.2 1.4 1.0 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.0 0.0
Employment (m) 2.64 2.65 2.69 2.72 2.71 2.70 2.75 2.80 2.82 2.84
Employment (% change) -0.1 0.3 1.8 1.1 -0.5 -0.3 1.8 1.7 1.0 0.7
Unemployment ('000) 131.3 116.8 107.8 105.5 130.5 151.7 119.7 90.7 62.7 43.0
Unemployment rate (%) 4.7 4.2 3.9 3.7 4.6 4.9 4.6 4.0 3.7 3.5
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
GDP deflator -1.4 3.8 6.8 -0.5 -3.7 6.2 2.7 1.3 -0.3 -0.2
Consumer prices (av) 3.5 1.9 2.8 2.2 1.3 3.0 2.6 1.9 1.8 1.8
Producer prices (av) -8.0 9.3 14.9 -3.6 -10.3 34.9 -5.0 2.8 2.1 2.0
GDP deflator (av) -1.4 3.8 6.8 -0.5 -3.7 6.2 2.7 1.3 -0.3 -0.2
Private consumption deflator (av) 3.2 1.9 2.2 2.2 1.6 3.4 3.3 3.9 1.4 1.4
Government consumption deflator (av) 2.9 2.9 3.9 3.1 2.6 3.0 2.6 1.9 1.8 1.8
Fixed investment deflator (av) 1.4 0.9 2.8 2.6 3.1 -14.0 0.2 0.2 1.1 1.1
Average nominal wages 1.1 2.1 3.3 3.7 1.9 3.1 2.9 2.2 2.3 2.3
Average real wages -2.4 0.3 0.5 1.5 0.6 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.5
Unit labour costs (Nkr-based; av) 0.9 c 0.1 c 2.3 c 2.8 c 4.5 c -0.8 1.8 0.7 0.7 0.7
Unit labour costs (US$-based) -3.1 c 1.7 c 3.9 c -4.9 c -2.4 c 8.8 4.0 -1.8 -1.5 0.1
Labour costs per hour (Nkr) 406.4 c 414.3 c 427.1 c 442.3 c 449.7 c 462.7 474.9 484.5 494.7 505.1
Labour costs per hour (US$) 48.4 c 50.1 c 52.5 c 50.3 c 47.7 c 53.9 56.5 56.2 56.1 57.0
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 14.8 21.6 35.0 11.7 7.2 30.1 31.8 26.4 15.7 7.6
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.0 5.4 8.0 2.9 2.0 6.9 6.8 5.6 3.3 1.6
Goods: exports fob 88.9 103.8 121.9 103.3 82.3 127.3 135.0 135.8 134.2 134.8
Goods: imports fob -76.0 -80.6 -88.1 -87.6 -82.3 -95.6 -103.1 -111.0 -118.3 -127.8
Trade balance 12.9 23.2 33.8 15.7 -0.1 31.7 31.9 24.8 16.0 7.0
Services: credit 41.5 40.5 43.4 43.4 35.5 34.6 34.1 37.6 37.7 41.8
Services: debit -48.3 -49.8 -52.2 -52.5 -37.0 -42.8 -45.4 -47.3 -50.5 -53.9
Services balance -6.9 -9.3 -8.8 -9.1 -1.4 -8.1 -11.4 -9.8 -12.8 -12.1
Primary income: credit 39.6 42.4 49.4 44.6 38.4 40.4 52.7 59.1 54.1 57.8
Primary income: debit -23.9 -27.9 -32.8 -32.8 -22.2 -27.6 -35.0 -41.2 -35.1 -38.5
Primary income balance 15.7 14.5 16.6 11.8 16.2 12.8 17.6 17.9 19.1 19.3
Secondary income: credit 4.3 5.1 5.5 5.4 5.5 4.7 5.1 5.2 5.2 5.2
Secondary income: debit -11.3 -11.9 -12.1 -12.1 -13.0 -11.0 -11.6 -11.7 -11.7 -11.8
Secondary income balance -7.0 -6.8 -6.7 -6.7 -7.5 -6.3 -6.4 -6.5 -6.5 -6.6
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 69.3 77.9 93.1 79.0 59.4 87.4 89.0 86.5 82.6 80.3
Export prices (% change) -13.5 12.3 19.5 -15.1 -24.8 47.1 1.8 -2.8 -4.5 -2.7
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 87.8 90.8 97.7 95.4 92.7 106.8 107.2 107.4 108.1 110.8
Import prices (% change) -2.7 3.4 7.6 -2.3 -2.9 15.2 0.4 0.3 0.6 2.6
Terms of trade (2010=100) 79.0 85.8 95.3 82.8 64.1 81.9 83.0 80.5 76.4 72.5
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 4.4 c 4.7 c 3.4 c 2.3 c -7.1 c 7.4 6.2 3.8 3.5 4.4
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment -18.7 5.9 -5.7 17.1 -4.9 0.4 5.2 8.2 10.5 12.4
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) -5.1 1.5 -1.3 4.2 -1.4 0.1 1.1 1.7 2.2 2.6
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) -20.1 6.0 -5.4 16.4 -5.1 0.5 5.3 8.4 10.7 12.3
Outward direct investment -6.6 -3.3 -14.4 -8.2 6.0 -4.7 -7.1 -7.7 -8.2 -8.6
Net foreign direct investment -25.2 2.6 -20.1 8.9 1.1 -4.3 -1.9 0.4 2.3 3.7
Stock of foreign direct investment 225.9 244.7 249.3 256.2 254.2 254.7 259.8 268.0 278.5 290.9
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 43,018 46,258 46,826 47,833 47,212 46,909 47,464 48,546 50,029 51,822
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 61.4 61.4 56.9 63.0 70.4 58.8 55.6 56.6 59.1 60.9
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) -0.69 0.27 -1.15 1.30 -0.38 0.03 0.35 0.53 0.65 0.74
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.80 0.82 0.78 0.75 0.76 0.69 0.67 0.66 0.66 0.66
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is The Economist Intelligence Unit
Global data OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: The Economist Intelligence Unit aggregate
OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: Brent import price
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IFS
Three-month Euribor rate: IFS
Domestic data GDP: Statistics Norway
Population: UN
Consumer prices: Statistics Norway
Average hourly earnings in manufacturing: MEI
Industrial production: Statistics Norway
Exchange rates and interest rates: IFS
External trade: IFS
Foreign direct investment: IFS
Unemployment: Statistics Norway
General government deficit and gross public debt: OECD, Economic Outlook; Eurostat
Abbreviations IFS: IMF, International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
MEI: OECD, Main Economic Indicators
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows The Economist Intelligence Unit to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by The Economist Intelligence Unit for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2016-20) and from Economist Intelligence Unit assessments for the forecast period (2021-25). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by The Economist Intelligence Unit for 2016-20. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2021-25 are based on Economist Intelligence Unit assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; The Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2016-20 ranges are then used to derive 2021-25 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2021-25, not to the likely situation in 2025 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2018 or 2023). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2017-21   2022-26  
  Norway Regional average a Norway Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 5 4.6 5 4.7
  2. Risk of social unrest 5 4.1 5 3.9
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 5 4.8 5 4.8
  4. Government and opposition 4 4.2 4 4.0
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 5 4.1 5 4.0
  6. International disputes or tensions 5 3.9 5 3.8
  7. Government policy towards business 4 3.9 4 3.8
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 4 3.6 4 3.4
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 4 3.7 4 3.8
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 5 3.9 5 4.1
 11. Efficiency of legal system 5 3.9 5 3.9
 12. Corruption 5 3.9 5 4.1
 13. Impact of crime 5 4.1 5 4.2
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 5 4.9 5 4.9
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 5 3.7 5 4.1
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 4 2.7 5 2.8
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 4 4.5 3 4.7
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 5 4.4 5 4.4
  6. Quality of policymaking 5 3.7 5 4.1
  7. Institutional underpinnings 5 4.6 5 4.6
  8. Asset prices 2 2.3 3 2.4
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 4 4.0 4 4.2
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 5 4.9 5 5.0
  3. Real GDP growth* 2 1.8 2 2.8
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 3 3.7 3 3.7
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 1 1.5 2 2.2
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 1 1.6 2 2.4
  7. The natural resource endowment* 5 3.3 5 3.3
  8. Profitability* 2 1.9 3 3.0
  9. Regional integration 4 4.8 4 4.7
 10. Proximity to markets 4 4.7 4 4.2
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 5 4.7 5 4.8
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 4 3.8 4 4.0
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 4 3.9 4 4.0
  4. Promotion of competition 4 3.7 4 3.7
  5. Protection of intellectual property 5 4.5 5 4.6
  6. Price controls 4 4.1 4 4.1
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 4 3.3 4 3.4
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 3 3.7 3 3.6
  9. Minority shareholders 5 4.2 5 4.2
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 4 4.2 4 3.4
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 4 3.8 4 3.8
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 5 4.8 5 4.9
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 5 4.6 5 4.6
  5. Government favouritism 4 3.9 4 3.3
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 5 4.8 5 4.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 5 4.4 4 4.1
  3. Ease of trading* 5 4.6 5 4.6
  4. Openness of trade* 3 4.4 3 4.4
  5. Restrictions on the current account 5 4.9 5 5.0
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 4 4.3 5 4.4
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 3 2.7 4 2.9
  3. Value-added tax* 1 2.4 1 2.3
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 3 2.8 3 2.8
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 3 3.6 4 3.8
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 4 3.8 4 3.8
  7. Tax complexity 3 3.4 4 3.4
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 4 2.9 4 3.3
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 5 4.5 5 4.6
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 4 4.0 4 4.0
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 4 3.4 5 4.0
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 5 4.3 5 4.4
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 4 3.4 5 3.7
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 3 2.6 2 2.5
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 5 4.5 5 4.6
  3. Quality of workforce* 4 3.9 4 4.0
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 5 4.3 5 4.4
  5. Health of the workforce* 5 4.9 5 5.0
  6. Level of technical skills 4 4.2 4 4.1
  7. Cost of living* 2 3.1 2 3.0
  8. Incidence of strikes* 4 3.7 4 3.8
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 3 3.2 3 3.4
 10. Extent of wage regulation 3 3.4 3 3.3
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 4 3.8 4 3.7
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 4 4.2 5 4.6
  2. Broadband connection speed* 5 4.6 5 4.6
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 4 4.3 4 4.4
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 5 4.6 5 4.6
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 5 3.8 5 3.8
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 5 4.2 5 4.3
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 4 4.4 4 4.6
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 5 4.2 5 4.4
  9. Rents of office space* 2 1.6 1 1.6
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 4 4.4 4 4.2
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 5 4.7 5 4.8
  3. Scope of e-government* 5 4.3 5 4.6
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 5 4.4 5 4.1
  5. Internet use* 5 4.4 5 5.0
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 1 2.7 1 2.5
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 4 4.3 5 4.6
  8. Research infrastructure* 4 4.4 4 4.3
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

Subject: Oil reserves; Tax rates; Petroleum industry; Exports; Foreign exchange rates; Labor force; Tax refunds; Economic conditions; Pandemics; Productivity; Consumption; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Population growth; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Cost control; Climate change; Natural gas reserves; Immigration; Labor market; Economic forecasts

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Petroleum industry Exports Foreign exchange rates Labor force Tax refunds Economic conditions Productivity Consumption International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Cost control Labor market Economic forecasts; Industry: 21112 :‎ Crude Petroleum Extraction

Location: Norway; Western Europe

Classification: 21112: Crude Petroleum Extraction

Identifier / keyword: Norway; Western Europe

Title: Country Forecast Norway September 2021

Publication title: Country Forecast. Norway; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science

ISSN: 09669450

e-ISSN: 20489536

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611016190

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-norway-september-2021/docview/2611016190/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Slovakia 3rd Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-slovakia-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2637242154/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Slovakia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Slovakia+3rd+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-10&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Slovakia&amp;rft.issn=13664050&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Slovakia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Slovakia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Slovakia 3rd Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Slovakia; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13664050

e-ISSN: 20475799

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2637242154

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-slovakia-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2637242154/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-03-09

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Thailand September 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-thailand-september-2021/docview/2637236157/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Thailand&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Thailand+September+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-10&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Thailand&amp;rft.issn=13564056&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Thailand; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: Thailand; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Thailand September 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Thailand; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13564056

e-ISSN: 20475926

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2637236157

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-thailand-september-2021/docview/2637236157/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-03-09

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Egypt September 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-egypt-september-2021/docview/2611016627/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: [...]there is a leap in the score for policy towards private enterprise and competition. Economic outlook 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Real GDP growth (%) 3.6 3.3 4.4 5.3 5.7 5.2 Consumer price inflation (av, %) 5.1 5.5 5.9 5.0 5.1 5.2 Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.9 -8.1 -7.4 -5.9 -5.4 -5.3 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.7 -4.6 -4.5 -4.3 -3.3 -1.6 3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 13.1 13.4 13.5 13.8 13.8 14.0 Exchange rate E£:US$ (av) 15.8 15.7 15.7 15.9 16.4 17.0 The government secured support from multilateral agencies during the pandemic crisis, including a renewed IMF programme and an increased allocation of special drawing rights. Long-term outlook 2021-30 2031-50 2021-50 Growth and productivity (% change; annual av) Growth of real GDP per head 2.6 2.1 2.3 Growth of real GDP 4.4 3.6 3.8 Labour productivity growth 1.4 1.3 1.3 Egypt has started to address long-standing market distortions, and there is significant potential for strong real economic growth in the long term. Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 100.6 Population growth 2.5 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 368.0 Real GDP growth 4.3 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 1,290.2b Real domestic demand growth 3.9 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 3,658 Inflation 14.1 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 12,825b Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.4 Exchange rate (av) E£:US$ 15.8 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 2.9 a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Egypt&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Egypt+September+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-09&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Egypt&amp;rft.issn=09669507&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - Egypt's political sphere will remain tightly controlled during the forecast period. The president, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, will maintain internal stability during his second term, which has been extended to 2024 (with the possibility of serving a third term until 2030). Protest activity will continue to be heavily suppressed, with the government concerned that the economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic or a resurgence in inflation could spark renewed unrest. Stability will be maintained in the medium term but the military could intervene again (as it did in 2013 to remove the Muslim Brotherhood from power) if the current regime is seen to fail to deliver on the economy or corruption. The security forces will face intermittent challenges from armed Islamist groups. Competition with Turkey in the eastern Mediterranean will remain a strategic concern in the medium term.

Egypt--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
4.81 5.68 69 62 11 9
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.

- Egypt's business environment score improves for the forecast period, and its global and regional rankings rise by seven and two places respectively. The economy has proved relatively resilient during the pandemic and has been strengthened by earlier reforms and external support, pushing up the macroeconomic environment ranking. Investment and licensing reforms are helping to reduce high levels of red tape and to boost incentives for private enterprise. Consequently, there is a leap in the score for policy towards private enterprise and competition. Nonetheless, progress will be variable owing to resistance from vested interest groups in the government and the military.

Egypt--highlights: Economic outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Real GDP growth (%) 3.6 3.3 4.4 5.3 5.7 5.2
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 5.1 5.5 5.9 5.0 5.1 5.2
Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.9 -8.1 -7.4 -5.9 -5.4 -5.3
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.7 -4.6 -4.5 -4.3 -3.3 -1.6
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 13.1 13.4 13.5 13.8 13.8 14.0
Exchange rate E£:US$ (av) 15.8 15.7 15.7 15.9 16.4 17.0

- The government secured support from multilateral agencies during the pandemic crisis, including a renewed IMF programme and an increased allocation of special drawing rights. Economic reform will remain focused on fiscal and structural deficiencies, with a view to consolidating the public finances, shoring up foreign reserves and enhancing the business environment. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the fiscal and current-account deficits to narrow from 2022, but economic growth will be slow initially. Inflation will edge up in 2021 as global price pressures rise but will remain in single digits. Macroeconomic stability will be achieved slowly, spreading to the private sector only gradually, owing to weak institutional capacity.

Egypt--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2015 2020 2025
Total 89.0 100.6 110.0
 Male 45.0 50.8 55.6
 Female 44.0 49.8 54.4
Period averages (%)   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth   2.5 1.8
Working-age population growth   2.2 1.7
Labour force growth   0.4 2.8

- Egypt, which remains the most populous state in the Middle East, will experience an increase in its working-age population in 2021-25. This will present both a demographic opportunity, owing to the presence of a sizeable, youthful workforce, and a demographic challenge if unemployment continues to rise for an extended period after the pandemic (not our central forecast). The pandemic has resulted in the return of large numbers of the estimated 5m Egyptians working in Gulf Arab states. The role of the Gulf in absorbing surplus Egyptian labour is likely to diminish early in the forecast period, but the Gulf will still continue to employ a significant number of Egyptians. Egypt is highly urbanised, with nearly one-tenth of the population living in Cairo.

Egypt--highlights: Market opportunities   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 368 401 435 478 512 549
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 3,658 3,913 4,175 4,504 4,742 4,991
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 326 361 397 434 463 489
Household consumption (US$ bn) 316 346 379 412 437 459
Household consumption per head (US$) 3,140 3,380 3,640 3,880 4,050 4,180

- In population terms, Egypt boasts the largest consumer market in the Middle East and North Africa. However, the potential of this market will be constrained by weak purchasing power among poorer Egyptians, reflecting an only modest recovery in real wages from the tough economic reforms implemented in 2016-19 and from the pandemic crisis. Poorer consumers will remain wary of spending amid subsidy reform and recent economic instability. GDP per head figures mask deep income disparities between the rich and the poor, with most of the population in the latter category. Nevertheless, income per head will grow steadily throughout 2021-25, including in US dollar terms despite some depreciation of the US currency later in the forecast period.

Egypt--highlights: Long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 2.6 2.1 2.3
Growth of real GDP 4.4 3.6 3.8
Labour productivity growth 1.4 1.3 1.3

- Egypt has started to address long-standing market distortions, and there is significant potential for strong real economic growth in the long term. However, success will also depend on a commitment to structural reform, as well as on major improvements to institutional effectiveness. We forecast that real GDP growth will average 4.4% a year in 2021-30 and 3.8% in 2021-50, with labour productivity growth being a significant contributor.

Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 100.6 Population growth 2.5
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 368.0 Real GDP growth 4.3
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 1,290.2 b Real domestic demand growth 3.9
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 3,658 Inflation 14.1
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 12,825 b Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.4
Exchange rate (av) E£:US$ 15.8 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 2.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Background: In 1952 an army coup brought an end to the monarchy in Egypt. Two years later, Gamal Abdel Nasser, a former military officer, led the country (1954-70) and introduced nationalist policies. Under his successor as president, Anwar Sadat (1970-81), Egypt's political stance shifted towards the West and its economic policies became more liberal. Mr Sadat's signing in 1979 of a peace treaty with Israel eventually led to his assassination and the appointment of his deputy, Hosni Mubarak, as president in 1981. However, Mr Mubarak grew increasingly unpopular among Egyptians as official corruption became rampant during his three-decade tenure, and a popular uprising, backed by the military, forced his resignation in early 2011. The Muslim Brotherhood, which had been banned since 1954, won the parliamentary and presidential elections in 2012; however, in the wake of mass protests, it was ousted by the military in July 2013. The former army chief, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, was elected president in a landslide victory in 2014 and was re-elected in 2018.
Political structure: Egypt's semi-presidential system is based on the 2014 constitution, which granted parliament wider powers, including the right to withdraw confidence from the president. However, the current parliament-elected in late 2015-lacks an effective opposition bloc. In April 2019 the constitution was amended to extend the presidential term and strengthen the powers of the office-including over parliament, the judiciary and the military. Cabinet ministers are often subjected to scrutiny, which can result in their dismissal and, in some cases, court action.
Policy issues: Weak institutional capacity and opposition from vested interests often block economic reform. Nonetheless, the Sisi regime is keen to enhance the business environment and consolidate the public finances through fiscal reform, although reform capacity will be diminished by the need to deal with waves of Covid-19 and by related spending.
Taxation: The top tax rate on firms and individuals was lowered in mid-2015 from 25% to 22.5% on incomes of E£200,000 (US$22,523 at the pre-2016 flotation official rate) or above. At the same time a 10% capital gains tax was suspended for two years to boost competitiveness; it has been repeatedly deferred since, most recently owing to the pandemic. A 10% tax on stock dividends was retained, although the rate was halved during the pandemic, when a temporary 1% surcharge on salaries was levied. Value-added tax (VAT) of 13% was introduced in August 2016 and raised to 14% in fiscal year 2017/18.
Foreign trade: Egypt has a large structural trade deficit. Despite declining hydrocarbons output, oil and gas remain the country's leading export earners. Suez Canal transit fees provide about US$5bn a year in foreign-currency inflows, and the current account fluctuates, normally registering a modest deficit.
Major exports 2019 % of total Major imports 2019 % of total
Oil & natural gas 40.6 Machinery & equipment 17.5
Food 11.8 Oil & natural gas 17.3
Cotton & other textiles 9.9 Chemicals 9.5
Chemicals 8.6 Vehicles 6.6
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
UAE 10.7 China 14.8
Saudi Arabia 6.4 US 6.7
Turkey 6.2 Saudi Arabia 6.5
US 5.5 Germany 5.8
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance Present government: The president, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, won a second four-year term in March 2018; the current government took office in June that year, with Mostafa Madbouly taking office as prime minister. The only significant change during the first year of Mr Sisi's second term was the replacement of the transport minister following a train disaster in February 2019. A reshuffle at the end of 2019 included the abolition of the Ministry of Investment, with the prime minister's office assuming oversight of investment. The Madbouly cabinet remained in office after the late 2020 parliamentary election, with parliament conceding to the president the right to appoint a new government. Domestic policy will remain largely focused on economic and social reform. Among the key ministers are the finance minister, the foreign minister and the planning and economic development minister. The health and population minister has taken a central role in directing the government's response to the coronavirus pandemic and in rolling out the universal health insurance scheme.
The technocratic government is subservient to the president The cabinet is largely technocratic, which reflects a constitutional bar on members of parliament (MPs) serving in the executive. Many cabinet ministers are Western-educated, but the cap on public-sector salaries has made it harder to recruit ministers who have had success in the private sector. The president has taken steps to boost the representation of Copts and women in the cabinet; following the end-2019 reshuffle, there are eight female ministers.
The armed forces and their various affiliates have assumed an increasingly important role in the economy during Mr Sisi's rule, and particularly in infrastructure projects. This trend is likely to be reinforced in the coming years. One of the most important figures in the cabinet is the transport minister, Kamel el-Wazir, who was head of the Egyptian Armed Forces Engineering Agency before his appointment in March 2019. Mr Wazir has been given a mandate to effect a major upgrade to the railway system. The Ministry of Military Production also wields significant influence over the economy.
Parliamentary forces: The complex make-up of parliament has changed following the 2020 elections, with Mostaqbal Watan (MW), a new party formed by pro-Sisi activists, having secured large majorities in both the lower house (the House of Representatives) and the restored upper house (the Senate), but it remains in effect a rubber-stamp body loyal to the president. The previous, unicameral parliament was dominated by a Sisi-loyalist bloc, including figures with close ties to the security services and businesspeople, but this was made up mainly of independents, and no party held a majority. The first election for the Senate (which was abolished in 2013 but restored in 2019) took place in August 2020. The ostensible reason for its revival was to provide an extra layer of parliamentary scrutiny, but, given that 100 of its 300 members are appointed by the president and that candidate lists for the elections for both houses were closely scrutinised, it has also enabled Mr Sisi to tighten his control over the legislature. The Senate election followed a change to the voting system that gave more scope for the larger parties to form strong blocs; a 15-party bloc led by MW won the list allocation unopposed, and MW also won more than two-thirds of the individually contested seats on a turnout of just 14% of eligible voters. The election to the lower house (which has 596 seats, including 28 appointed by the president) followed a similar pattern. A bloc set up by MW with 13 other parties won all 284 list seats, with party quotas allocated in a process dominated by MW. Of the total list seats, MW took 145, the Republican People's Party (which is led by a former leading figure in MW and also the second-largest party in the Senate) secured 28, independents 25 and the New Wafd Party 21, with the remainder shared among smaller parties and a similar spread of seats among the individually-contested seats. Al-Nour, a Salafi party, was the only party not on the MW-led list to win a significant number of seats. The new parliament will have hardly any dissenting voices, even compared with its predecessor where there was an opposition bloc of 25-30 MPs. The turnout in the lower house election was below 30%; low turnout indicates growing public disengagement with a political process that is so tightly controlled by the president and his backers.
Parliamentary representation a
(2020 election results)
  House of Representatives Senate
Mostaqbal Watan 316 149
Independent 124 88
Republican People's Party 50 17
New Wafd Party 26 10
Homeland Defenders' Party 23 11
Modern Egypt Party 11 4
Reform and Development Party 9 3
Egyptian Social Democratic Party 7 3
Egyptian Freedom Party 7 1
Egyptian Conference Party 7 3
Al-Nour 7 2
Tagammu 6 5
Justice Party 2 1
Eradet Geel Party 1 1
National Movement Party - 2
Total 596 300
a Includes seats appointed by the president.
Source: National Elections Commission; Press reports.
Political outlook: Political stability The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the president, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, to retain power throughout the forecast period and beyond. Constitutional changes have extended his current (second) term from four to six years, until 2024, and will allow him to stand for a further six-year term, until 2030, when he will be 75 years old. His tightening control over other branches of government, alongside the support of the military and public distaste for stoking renewed instability, will ensure that he retains a tight grip on power.
The authorities will continue to stifle critics while attempting to use supportive economic measures to defuse social tensions. However, the government's autocratic nature, the prioritisation of military interests and a dictatorial approach to policy implementation expose Mr Sisi's regime to a backlash over unpopular measures. Post-coronavirus fiscal restraint and higher global food prices could provide a basis for protests, but the authorities will crack down hard before unrest can gather enough momentum threaten overall stability. A combination of effective deployment by Mr Sisi's security apparatus and public fatigue with political instability stemming from the 2011 revolution and its aftermath is likely to contain such pressures.
In the light of demographic pressures and rapid growth in the labour force (of 2-3% a year), domestic policies will focus on economic development, in particular in the restive Sinai Peninsula and other deprived areas, to prevent unemployment from becoming a political threat. Mr Sisi (who was formerly the head of the armed forces) will maintain a large internal security apparatus to underpin the authoritarian system and crack down on Islamist militants. Sporadic, small-scale incidents of militancy will occur, and development strategies will fail to improve conditions sufficiently for many impoverished Egyptians, but in general we expect Mr Sisi's regime to deliver sufficiently on the economy to prevent a political crisis.
Parliament's subservience to Mr Sisi has increased following the 2020 parliamentary election, with pro-Sisi groups tightening their hold on the legislature. Remnants of opposition to the government still come from Sinai-based Islamist groups, and from the Muslim Brotherhood-support for which has ebbed-and its militant offshoots. However, we expect the military to successfully limit the threat from Islamist militancy.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness Egypt's bureaucracy is arguably the largest in the region-and among the most bloated globally-with nearly 6m workers employed by the central government, according to official 2019 data. (This excludes about 3m additional workers who are employed by the state on temporary contracts and a military of about 1.5m.) As a result, inefficiency is particularly endemic in the government sector. Overstaffing has placed a heavy burden on the public finances and left few funds for improving public services and upgrading systems. Domestic reform is sometimes held back by the populist bent of parliament, although the legislature has co-operated with the state to implement a raft of austerity measures that have helped to unlock significant multilateral financial support, notably from the IMF, which in 2020 agreed to provide US$8bn in loans to help the government to deal with the impact of the pandemic, supplementing the US$12bn disbursed in 2016-19 in the form of an extended fund facility.
Mr Sisi has professed his determination to make the government more efficient and to crack down on corruption. In the 2020 Corruption Perceptions Index compiled by Transparency International, Egypt was ranked 117th out of the 180 countries surveyed, with the same score as Ukraine, Zambia and Sierra Leone; despite an anti-corruption drive by the Sisi government, according to Transparency International's index, there has been barely any overall reduction in corruption since 2012 in Egypt. The agency tasked with combating corruption is the Administrative Control Authority, which is closely tied to the presidency and whose scope, according to a law passed in 2017, is restricted to the civilian bureaucracy. This means that there is no institutional structure for scrutinising the expanding role of the military establishment and the intelligence services in the economy.
The prerogatives of the military were strengthened in a set of constitutional amendments that were approved in April 2019. These amendments also reinforced the presidency's control over the judiciary (and over military appointments). A tightening of restrictions on public expression has also hit civil society organisations, which are heavily constrained. The increasing centralisation of power within the presidential office and among senior military and intelligence figures is likely to yield some improvements in the efficiency of government operations, but at the expense of accountability and at the risk of fostering corruption within these privileged echelons of the state.
Another important development during the forecast period will be the transfer of government operations from Cairo to the new administrative capital, to the east. Ministries were scheduled to start this process during 2020. The pandemic resulted in a delay to this schedule, but the government has indicated that the relocation of ministries will start in late 2021. The move provides an opportunity to streamline government operations by having a dedicated zone for them, with modern infrastructure and information technology services. However, there will inevitably be some disruption during the transfer.
Political outlook: Election watch Elections are less a democratic exercise than a means for Mr Sisi to consolidate power. This carries a risk of volatile regime change, but probably beyond the forecast period. Mostaqbal Watan (Future of the Homeland), a pro-Sisi party, won the most seats by far in the House of Representatives (lower house) election in late 2020, on a turnout of less than 30%. In addition, most smaller blocs and nominal independents are supportive of the government, given the tight restrictions that were placed on which candidates could stand for election. Mostaqbal Watan will be the favoured conduit for enacting government policies, with its parliamentary dominance strengthening the president's direct influence over the legislature. Mr Sisi, who seems to be in relatively good health, can stand for another term at the next presidential election, in 2024, and is likely to stay in power until 2030. Repeatedly delayed municipal elections are likely to be held by 2022; these are important for businesses, as municipal councils implement local investment regulations.
Political outlook: International relations Egypt, which faces numerous threats to its security and national interests from neighbouring countries, will seek to project an image of military strength. However, in reality the government will shy away from confrontation and prefer conciliation. Established security ties with regional powers will be leveraged to contain Iran and curb the growing influence of Egypt's regional rival, Turkey, in Libya and the eastern Mediterranean. Ongoing hydrocarbons development in the eastern Mediterranean has heightened this competition, and Egypt will continue to view Turkey's threat to its energy interests as best contained by regional diplomacy. In this vein, Egypt will co-ordinate with Greece, Cyprus and Israel, its Mediterranean neighbours, over natural gas development. The country will also be an active participant in the nascent political process in Libya, where Egypt and Turkey had been backing rival administrations, to increase its influence over Libya's political and economic reconstruction efforts.
Egypt will continue to lean on member states of the Gulf Co-operation Council for economic and diplomatic support and to co-ordinate with them on pressing international issues. The lifting of the Saudi-UAE-Bahraini-Egyptian boycott of Qatar in January will activate new trade and investment partnerships with the wealthy Gulf state, but suspicions over differing positions on regional issues will linger. Egypt, the UAE, Israel and Saudi Arabia will step up joint efforts against security threats, with Israel's normalisation of ties with several regional states facilitating increased bilateral security-and economic-co-ordination.
Saudi Arabia has also given more explicit backing to Egypt over Ethiopia's filling of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, which is scheduled to resume in July and will constrain the flow of water from the Blue Nile to Egypt. A chasm remains between Egyptian and Sudanese concerns about flow rates and Ethiopia's concerns about its sovereignty. Egypt will again favour negotiation over military confrontation, but given the intense rivalry and the growing importance of water security, the latter scenario cannot be ruled out. Ethiopia may agree to modest slowdowns in fill rates during drought periods, especially as internal strife in Ethiopia will limit the government's appetite for a deeper dispute. However, Ethiopia will reject more sweeping concessions, as the existing water-sharing agreement favours Egypt.
Another delicate but crucial area of foreign policy will be maintaining cordial ties with the US. Mr Sisi's authoritarian style and human rights infractions are likely to cause friction in the relationship-as they will with strategic and commercial allies in Europe-but not sufficiently to seriously endanger relations. Egypt will add to its geostrategic value to the US by acting as mediator in regional disputes, in particular between Israel and Palestine, ensuring that security ties and the bulk of US financial support are maintained. To counter potential criticism from Western allies and defend its regional interests, Egypt will highlight its regional credentials as a conciliator, albeit one with a regionally important military force of potential value to the US.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
Overall position 4.81 5.68 69 62 11 9
Political environment 4.6 5.0 61 58 10 8
 Political stability 5.1 5.1 61 60 7 6
 Political effectiveness 4.2 4.9 54 50 10 9
Macroeconomic environment 3.8 6.1 81 59 17 8
Market opportunities 6.4 6.4 11 35 1 4
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 3.8 5.0 69 58 12 9
Policy towards foreign investment 5.1 6.0 66 56 11 7
Foreign trade & exchange controls 5.1 5.5 72 73 11 11
Taxes 6.2 6.3 40 48 9 8
Financing 4.4 5.9 70 56 12 8
The labour market 5.0 5.4 76 70 12 7
Infrastructure 4.5 5.8 57 54 11 9
Technological readiness 4.1 5.2 66 63 10 8
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.
Policy reforms will continue in a bid to cement earlier gains despite pandemic Egypt's overall score improves for the forecast period (2021-25), and its regional and global rankings rise by two and seven places respectively. The main reason for this is a big improvement in the macroeconomic environment category, with the regional and global rankings rising sharply to eighth and 59th respectively. To a large extent, the improvement reflects the benefits (which took time to be felt) of IMF-backed reforms undertaken in 2016-19, in particular the flotation of the currency, and an IMF programme in 2020-21 has consolidated those efforts. Egypt's real GDP growth was also less severely affected by the coronavirus pandemic than that of its regional peers. More broadly, Egypt's improved rankings in most categories reflects the shift in priorities towards structural reform-as reflected in the National Structural Reform Programme launched in April 2021-after a period in which the main focus was on fiscal retrenchment.
In most categories both the scores and the rankings improve but, after a sharp improvement in conditions in the historical period, the market opportunities score for the forecast period is unchanged and the ranking falls. Egypt's score for taxes improves marginally, and its regional ranking rises by one position, but its global ranking slips as the fiscal position will provide little leeway for reducing the tax burden on businesses. The Ministry of Finance is proceeding with plans to digitalise its tax accounts, which should increase efficiency and transparency. A new customs law provides for electronic clearance of goods, helping to streamline trade and logistics. A system of digital pre-clearance of goods though advanced cargo information (ACI) declarations went into effect from July 1st 2021, aimed at speeding up customs procedures and improving security. The restoration of investment tax incentives, withdrawn in 2005, will improve Egypt's competitiveness in relation to other regional investment destinations. Access to finance will improve, as firms will find it easier to secure foreign exchange, and a rise in the government's external borrowing will free up more domestic bank liquidity for lending to the private sector.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Egypt's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2021-22: The Sovereign Fund of Egypt becomes increasingly active in promoting private investment in state assets. Public-private partnerships are encouraged. Military-run enterprises retain dominance in key sectors.
2023-25: The sale in shares of state entities picks up pace, including the remaining shares in banks and stakes in some military entities. The National Bank of Egypt is kept in full public ownership.
Policy towards foreign investment 2021-22: The government actively courts foreign investment and improves tax breaks to keep foreign partners in Egypt, but conditions will remain tough, given the economic fallout from the pandemic.
2023-25: The investment law is amended following complaints from foreign firms about delays and bureaucratic obstacles.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2021-22: The government introduces measures to reduce red tape and import costs with new customs regulations.
2023-25: Capital controls are removed. Remaining restrictions on imports, including tariff surcharges on goods deemed to be luxuries, are lifted.
Taxes 2021-22: Some pandemic tax waivers and exemptions are lifted. Tax incentives and exemptions for the private sector are improved. Capital gains tax is introduced in 2022.
2023-25: Corporate income tax levels are reviewed. The value-added tax (VAT) rate is increased. Stamp duty on share transactions is increased.
Financing 2021-22: Lending to the private sector is subdued owing to pandemic aftershocks and as monetary stimulus is withdrawn.
2023-25: Domestic credit conditions improve despite a small rise in policy rates. Foreign banks increase their direct lending to Egyptian projects, and leading Egyptian banks receive enhanced ratings from international agencies.
The labour market 2021-22: Labour participation remains low in the wake of the pandemic, with women staying out of labour-force. As employment opportunities rise, workers push for wage increases to compensate for the erosion of real wages since 2016.
2023-25: Unemployment trends down. Trade unions resist pension reforms that raise the retirement age to 65.
Infrastructure 2021-22: Major new rail projects progress, including a monorail serving the new administrative capital. A second container terminal is built at East Port Said. Suez development, new cities, slum clearance and Sinai infrastructure are prioritised.
2023-25: Road and rail connections to 14 new satellite cities are completed. Investment in seawater desalination increases.
Technological readiness 2021-22: Tax payments are digitised and e-government is expanded to help to ease pandemic pressures and as part of broader plans. Firms expand their presence on e-commerce platforms, but low internet penetration remains a hindrance.
2023-25: E-government portals are put into general use to automate processes of business-licensing applications.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
3.8 6.1 81 59 17 8
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.
Reforms of 2016-19 have helped build some resilience during the crisis Of all the categories, macroeconomic environment will see the biggest improve-ment for the forecast period. This reflects improvements in most key indicators as a result of reforms enacted since 2016. Falling inflation, strong growth in remittance inflows in 2020-21 and large increases in the minimum wage have outweighed the negative impact of the pandemic for most households. Tourism was hard hit by the pandemic, but the sector is likely to stage a strong recovery from 2022. Increased external borrowing has helped to mitigate immediate balance-of-payments risks, but it has aggravated the medium-term risk of a debt-service crunch. Real GDP growth will return to the previous trend of 5-6% later in the forecast period. Inflation is likely to remain subdued. The govern-ment will aim to continue to achieve primary fiscal surpluses during the forecast period, but it will struggle to hit its target of bringing public debt below 80% of GDP.
High repayment obligations pose long-term threat to external finances The flotation of the currency at the end of 2016 was a shock to Egypt's financial system, but it has contributed to a more manageable balance-of-payments position. The inflow of capital in the form of loans from international institutions, sovereign bond issues and a revival in direct and indirect foreign investment has enabled the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE, the central bank) to rebuild its foreign-exchange reserves to a comfortable level, and to relax capital controls. Reserves fell sharply at the beginning of the pandemic crisis but subsequently stabilised, owing to external borrowing and a resumption of inward portfolio investment, with an extra allocation of special drawing rights from the IMF in 2021 providing further support to the reserves position. Nevertheless, reserves could come under pressure later in the forecast period, when substantial debt repayments fall due.
Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
3.8 5.0 69 58 12 9
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.
Egypt's policy towards private enterprise and competition will improve over the forecast period as the government seeks to streamline the regulatory system. The global and regional rankings both rise as a result. However, private businesses-already hampered by the pandemic-will have to contend with the continued deep involvement of the armed forces and their various commercial arms in the economy. The government is offering stakes in some military ventures to private investors. The Sovereign Fund of Egypt will play an increasingly active role in channelling private investment into state assets. Efforts to promote private investment stretch back decades, but businesses face obstacles arising from inconsistencies in the legislation and inefficiency and corruption in the bureaucracy. Recent reforms to the licensing and investment laws are likely to result in some improvements, depending on implementation.

- Law 15 on industrial licensing and Law 72 on investment, passed in 2017, have helped to speed up the approval processes for private companies carrying out new projects and to enhance the authority of the quasi-autonomous agencies operating under the law: the Industrial Development Agency and the General Authority for Investment.

Legislation to encourage investment in both new and existing projects
- A revision in 2019 to Law 72 enables existing investment projects to qualify for incentives that were previously only open to new investment. The incentives include corporate tax discounts of 50% for projects in designated priority areas and 30% for projects in other areas. Another adjustment specifies that the fee for certifying signatures for contracts to set up a new project should be 0.25% of the paid-up capital, with an upper limit of E£10,000 (US$637).
- The establishment at the end of 2015 of SCZone, an agency responsible for the Suez Canal Economic Zone, was also intended as a signal to private business that the government was serious about creating a more user-friendly regulatory environment, but it has since become more closely tied to the state sector and the armed forces. However, changes to the leadership of the Suez Canal Authority, the public-sector agency in charge of overseeing the canal, has paved the way for SCZone to regain some autonomy, although it remains close to the military.
- The government has previously sought to assist domestic steel and cotton producers in the face of global pressures. Despite reforms to competition policy, loopholes and other impediments to competition remain in certain sectors, such as telecommunications and utilities, and corruption is still a problem, especially at local government level.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
5.1 6.0 66 56 11 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.
Despite intermittent market pressure, reforms will not be reversed Egypt's score for policy towards foreign investment improves markedly for the forecast period, and its global and regional rankings rise by ten and four places respectively, to 56th and seventh. The government is actively courting foreign investment by revamping the regulatory framework, including by restoring tax incentives, and by promoting new project proposals and zones. Foreign investors have also been encouraged by the reforms to the exchange-rate system, which have helped to ease access to foreign exchange needed to finance imports of equipment and materials and to allow for repatriation of dividends. Inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) rose steadily for most of the historical period, reaching US$9bn in 2019. FDI inflows fell in 2020, but are expected to recover strongly in the forecast period. Foreign investor interest in technology start-ups and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) is growing

- The investment law of 2017 and the subsequent amendments in 2019 have given new powers to the General Authority for Investment, with the provision for electronic approval of project proposals. The main issues the new law has sought to address are inconsistencies in the approval process and the demand from investors for the restoration of tax incentives, which were removed in 2005 on the grounds that they led to manipulative behaviour by businesses and that they deprived the Treasury of revenue.
- The efficacy of the new investments approval system will be tested during the forecast period. Businesses setting up new projects or expanding existing ones are entitled to claim discounts of 30-50% on their tax bills, up to the equivalent of 85% of their paid-in capital. The higher discounts are available for projects established in areas classified as deprived and for labour-intensive projects. The new law also allows for the creation of special investment zones.

Transparency on FDI flows is improving
- The investment law was amended in 2019 to enable its provisions to be extended to existing projects and the development of new product lines to benefit from tax exemptions. The amendments also included changes to the accounting system for FDI, by giving the General Authority for Investment full authority to record inflows. The definition of FDI has been broadened to reflect international practices, including allowing foreign acquisitions of stakes of less than 10% in Egyptian entities to be recorded as FDI. Foreign oil firms will be able to retain profits for reinvestment. Regularising the recording of flows will increase transparency, creating a more attractive FDI environment. The govern-ment has provided assurances that the investment law will bring an end to conflicts with the industrial licensing law, which also includes a streamlined approvals process. It remains doubtful whether such conflicts can be avoided in practice.
- The post of investment minister was abolished in late 2019, with responsibility for this area of policy shifting to the office of the prime minister in an effort to streamline investment policy implementation. The General Authority for Investment now reports directly to the prime minister.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
5.1 5.5 72 73 11 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.
Foreign trade and exchange controls will not be reimposed Egypt's score in this category improves, but its global ranking falls by one place and its regional ranking is unchanged. This reflects the stabilisation of the foreign-exchange market following a period of improvement underpinned by heavy external borrowing. Since 1994 there have been no explicit exchange controls in Egypt. Egypt has also accepted the obligations of sections 2, 3 and 4 of Article VIII of the IMF's Articles of Agreement. These oblige the authorities to refrain from imposing any restrictions on payments and transfers for current-account transactions or from engaging in discriminatory currency arrangements or multiple-currency practices without the IMF's approval. Nevertheless, the authorities did impose restrictions on foreign-exchange transfers after the rapid depletion of net international reserves in the wake of the 2011 revolution, and companies found it increasingly difficult to secure access to foreign exchange to finance imports and for the repatriation of dividends. The situation improved dramatically following the flotation of the Egyptian pound in November 2016. Restrictions on cash deposits to finance imports were relaxed, and in June 2017 the central bank removed limits (which had been imposed in 2011 and only partly relaxed in 2014) on banks providing clients with foreign currency to transfer abroad (previously limited to one transfer a year of up to US$100,000 per client).

- Net international reserves fell by almost US$10bn between February and May 2020 as a result of heavy withdrawals by portfolio investors in response to the pandemic. Equilibrium was restored after the government signed two agreements with the IMF, worth US$8bn in total, and secured US$5bn through a sovereign bond issue, with several subsequent bond offerings. However, high external debt repayment obligations could put intermittent pressure on the external finances.
- The exchange-rate system is now operated by commercial banks, with the central bank playing no formal role in the market. The exchange rate depreciated early in the pandemic crisis, depreciating by about 3% against the US dollar in May-June 2020, but rallied in the second half of the year, and has been stable at about E£15.70:US$1 during 2021, supported by strong capital inflows and increased remittances. Real exchange-rate appreciation is now a concern, with increased risk of a downward correction. Pressure on the currency will mount once the government starts repayments to the IMF in late 2021.
- The government and the central bank have taken steps to avert a balance-of-payments crisis arising from the pandemic. The strong relationship formed with the IMF during the US$12bn extended fund facility (EFF) programme in 2016-19 has helped Egypt to mobilise a further US$8bn from the IMF for 2020-21; US$5bn has been raised from the bond market in 2020, and a further US$2bn from a group of regional and international banks, stabilising the foreign-exchange market. In 2022 the government plans to issue its first sovereign sukuk (Islamic securities), tapping a new source of funding.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.2 6.3 40 48 9 8
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.
Tax policy will keep most gains, but an element of unpredictability remains Although some tax exemptions introduced during the pandemic will be lifted, tax policy will be stable overall. Egypt's global ranking falls by eight places, but its regional ranking improves by one place to eighth. The basic rate of income tax for companies was lowered to 22.5% in 2015, from 25%. The business community, which is strongly represented in parliament, has lobbied for a return to a 20% rate (in place in 2004-11), but the need for fiscal adjustment after the pandemic is likely to preclude such a move. Collection of corporate tax will improve with the digitalisation of the system. Tax discounts introduced in 2017 and 2019 for investors will remain in place. Since 2020 companies have been able to submit unified tax declarations, including income tax, value-added tax (VAT) and stamp duty. The government might increase the VAT rate from 14% to 15% as it tries to consolidate the public finances. Withholding tax is likely to remain at 20%. Following the flotation of the pound, foreign banks resumed investments in Egyptian Treasury bills as high returns and reduced foreign-exchange risk offset reservations about the withholding tax. These flows have fluctuated in line with global market sentiment, with capital flight in early 2020 followed by high inflows in late 2020.

- The implementation of the 2015 capital gains tax law has been deferred repeatedly, initially until May 2017, and then for a further three years. It was deferred again until January 2022 as part of coronavirus-mitigation measures and to stimulate capital markets. At the time of the 2017 deferment, stamp duty was introduced for share transactions. The stamp duty rates were reduced in 2020, and the tax on dividends was cut to 5% from 10%. It is not yet clear whether the capital gains tax will go into effect in 2022, as critics have argued that this would trigger capital flight. The rate of capital gains tax has been set at 10%. Investors are entitled to income tax discounts. A 1% emergency surcharge was levied on salaries to help to cover extra spending associated with the pandemic during fiscal year 2020/21 (July-June), but it has not been renewed.

The government has adjusted personal income tax thresholds
- Changes to personal income tax in the 2020/21 budget included increases to thresholds, reflecting the impact of high inflation during the previous few years. The threshold for paying the lowest tax rate of 2.5% was raised to annual earnings of E£15,000 (US$940) from E£8,000, and the rates charged for the next two bands were lowered by 5 percentage points to 10% (for E£30,000-45,000) and to 15% (E£45,000-60,000). The rate for the E£60,000-200,000 was lowered to 20% from 22.5% but for earnings of E£200,000-400,000 it has been left at 22.5%. A new top rate of 25% was applied to earnings above E£400,000.
- A new property tax law passed in 2014/15 has, since 2017/18, charged 10% tax on properties with a market value of E£2m (US$125,000) or more. There are exemptions for facilities and property owned by the armed forces. Valuations are to be reassessed every five years, with the next review scheduled to take place at end-2021. The tax is administered by the Egyptian Real Estate Tax Authority, which is affiliated to the finance ministry.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
4.4 5.9 70 56 12 8
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.
Confidence in the financial system has strenghtened despite pandemic blip The turnaround in Egypt's balance of payments that followed the signing of a its US$12bn EFF with the IMF in 2016 helped to anchor the economy during the pandemic, allowing a significant improvement in the score and rankings in the financing category. The global ranking rises by 14 places to 56th and the regional ranking from 12th to eighth. Increased confidence in the Egyptian financial system has been reflected in the series of successful sovereign debt issues undertaken by the finance ministry since January 2017, which have raised more than US$28bn, including US$5bn in May 2020 and US$3.8bn in February 2021. The finance ministry also raised US$2bn in a package of conventional and Islamic loans signed with a UAE-led group of banks in September 2020 and two loan agreements worth US$8bn in total with the IMF that year. Following the passage of a sovereign sukuk law, the government plans to launch its first issue of sukuk in 2022. The government mainly borrows to finance its budget, but government borrowing has also helped to stabilise the balance of payments. The shift to external borrowing will make more liquidity available in the domestic banking system for lending to the private sector. However, investors and creditors will have to consider the future risk of a large rise in Egypt's stock of external debt. Heavy repayments will fall due in 2022-25, including more than US$10bn to the IMF.
Looser monetary policy should allow greater private-sector borrowing
- Lending to the private sector will grow as the central bank loosens monetary policy and seeks to promote lending as part of a broader effort to stimulate economic recovery from the coronavirus shock. A surge in inflation in late 2016 prompted the CBE to raise interest rates by 700 basis points, bringing its main operation rate to 19.25% by July 2017. Inflation started to ease at the end of 2017, and the CBE cut rates in 2018-19 by a total of 650 basis points. In March 2020, in response to the pandemic crisis, the central bank cut policy rates by 300 basis points, followed by a further 50-basis-point cut to leave the rate at 9.25% by late 2020. High real interest rates help to attract foreign inflows into Treasury bills, but curb private-sector borrowing, and there is scope for further rate cuts if inflation remains subdued.
- The central bank has launched a series of schemes aimed at directing credit towards specific sectors. The first, in 2016, set a target for banks to allocate at least 20% of the loan portfolio to micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs); that target has been increased to 25%, with a deadline of end-2022. The interest rate was set at below market rates, and banks could offset the difference by reducing their statutory reserve. The scheme was extended to larger companies (with annual turnover of between E£50m and E£1bn) in late 2019, with the allocation ofE£100bn to be lent at 8% annual interest. In March-April 2020 the central bank took further measures to alleviate the burden on borrowers stemming from the pandemic. SMEs and household debtors were given a six-month debt-service waiver, and a similar provision was made for companies in the tourism sector. The central bank also abolished the upper limit on preferential borrowing by large and medium-sized firms.

Central bank provides guarantees to ease credit difficulties
- In May 2020 the central bank pledged E£100bn (US$6.3bn) in guarantees for subsidised loans to be provided by commercial banks to industrial, agricultural and contracting firms in order to provide assurance to banks at a time of elevated risk, owing to the pandemic. This was intended to provide an incentive for banks to continue to advance credit to businesses in order to help them to remain solvent and to retain their workforce during the downturn.
- According to the CBE, non-performing loans (NPLs) accounted for 3.5% of total loans in March 2021, compared with 7.1% in 2015. But this improvement in loan quality has come about partly because of the preference of banks to lend to the government rather than to private businesses. The government currently accounts for 66% of total bank credit, compared with 21% for the private business sector, according to the CBE. As lending to business revives, The Economist Intelligence Unit expects that the NPL ratio will also increase, albeit modestly.
- The stockmarket attracted strong inflows of foreign portfolio investment following the flotation of the pound. These inflows peaked in mid-2019 but there was a pandemic-induced reversal in 2020, with the EGX30 stockmarket index staging only a partial recovery since; it was still trading about 15-20% below the end-2019 position in August-September 2021. The market had been preparing for a series of offerings of state-owned shares in more than 20 companies. This process has already been subject to delays, but the first offerings could take place in 2022. The Sovereign Fund of Egypt is also likely to become increasingly active during 2022-25 in investing in state assets, including through stockmarket transactions.

Minimum capital requirements are rising for banks
- A new law approved in July 2020 increases the minimum capital require-ment for commercial banks tenfold to E£5bn (US$300m), a requirement the banks have until September 2021 to meet, with a further extension up to September 2023 possible. Foreign branches will be required to raise their capital threefold to at least US$150m. The new capital levels have been set with a view to complying with Basel III and Basel IV regulations, and to take account of devaluation since the previous level was set in 2003. Some consolidation has already been planned, with smaller banks likely to merge in order to comply with the new capital requirements. The law also has provisions for e-payments and financial technology (fintech) services.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
5.0 5.4 76 70 12 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.
The score and rankings for the forecast period rise both regionally and globally, reflecting improved economic performance and management since 2016. From a business perspective, the Egyptian labour market offers an abundance of young workers, with graduates, post-graduates and skilled and semi-skilled technicians available at very competitive rates. The return of Egyptian workers from the Gulf as a result of lay-offs of expatriates during the coronavirus pandemic will also add to the pool of experienced labour within Egypt. There are several drawbacks, however, notably the rigidity of labour market laws-which are set to become more restrictive-and regulations that make it difficult to fire workers (partly because it is extremely costly).
Unemployment is rising because of the economic fallout from the pandemic
- After reaching almost 13% in 2016, the unemployment rate fell to 7.7% at end-March 2020 but then rose sharply to 9.6% by end-June; about 2.6m jobs were lost during the second quarter of that year, as a result of a sharp drop in economic activity due to the pandemic, but the spike in the unemployment rate was contained owing to the withdrawal of many from the workforce, especially women. Sectors that were hit particularly hard included retail, tourism and manufacturing. Employment has since recovered strongly, with the official unemployment rate at about 7.4% in mid-2021. We expect the labour force participation rate to continue to pick up after its pandemic-induced decline from 2022 as the tourism sector recovers.
- The government sought to lessen the risk of labour unrest stemming from a fall in real wages (after the 2016 devaluation triggered high inflation) with a significant rise in the monthly minimum wage in the state sector, to E£2,000 (US$120), from E£1,200, with effect from July 2019, with a further increase to E£2,400 from July 2021. The government also increased the basic state pension by E£150 a month to E£900. Proposed reforms to the pension system, entailing a gradual increase in the retirement age to 65 from 60 and a shift to a hybrid defined benefit/defined contribution scheme tied to average lifetime earnings, rather than final salary, could also prompt opposition from workers.

Focus on private-sector employment
- The government is extending the minimum wage to the private sector (at E£2,400 a month), effective from January 1st 2022. Private companies will be obliged to increase wages at the start of each year by at least 3% of the salary, with a minimum monthly increase of E£60. The government has estimated that the new system will apply to 12m workers.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
4.5 5.8 57 54 11 9
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.
Government will seek to sustain growth with continued infrastructure spending Egypt's score for the quality of its infrastructure improves in 2021-25, with the global and regional rankings rising by three and two places respectively. This reflects heavy ongoing investment in upgrading infrastructure, with a particular focus on energy and transportation, but gaps remain. A principal focus of the investment drive has been the energy sector. Between June 2014 and June 2020 installed electricity-generating capacity rose from 32 GW to 59 GW, including three new 4.8-GW combined-cycle plants built by Siemens (Germany), as well as 2.4 GW of solar and wind capacity. The power sector has also benefited from higher natural gas supply owing to a rapid rise in domestic production. There is now a surplus of more than 27 GW of capacity over peak load.

- The Sovereign Fund of Egypt will take strategic stakes in existing assets to be transferred to the private sector, as well as in new projects. Its first major deal will entail the establishment of a partnership with an international developer to take over ownership and operation of the three Siemens power stations. The fund is also planning to take an anchor investment role in the installation of 2.4m cu metres/day of desalination capacity over the next five years, through 17 public-private partnership (PPP) projects.
- The contribution of renewable energy to total power capacity will increase over the forecast period, developed under a feed-in tariff programme with the development of a series of large-scale wind farms and solar installations.
- Work will start in 2022 on a 4.8-GW nuclear power station at El Dabaa, west of Alexandria. The project is to be carried out by Russia's Rosatom, including the supply of fuel and the disposal of waste. The first unit is likely to come on stream in 2027-28.

The government is investing heavily in energy and transport infrastructure
- The completion of a new 72-km channel in the Suez Canal has improved services for international shipping, but the blockage of the waterway in March 2021 after a large container ship became stuck across a section that had not been widened, was a blow to the canal's reputation. The government is considering an expansion in the southern part of the canal. A new channel has been dredged at the northern end of the canal to upgrade access to the East Port Said container terminal and to allow for its expansion. A second terminal is likely to be built, although contract negotiations have failed to progress. Meanwhile, Hong Kong's Hutchison Ports is developing a commercial container terminal at the Abu Qir naval base, west of Alexandria, which will start operations in 2022. Germany's DB Schenker is developing a dry port in 6th of October City, south-west of Cairo, in the first of a series of planned PPP dry port projects.
- Major rail transport projects will make progress during the forecast period. These include a monorail system serving the new administrative capital and the new 6th of October City. The government is also pressing ahead with upgrades to the existing rail system, which has a poor safety record. A contract was signed in September 2021 with Siemens Mobility for a US$4.8bn high-speed rail link between the Gulf of Suez and the Mediterranean. Further sections of the Cairo metro will be completed during the forecast period. The European Investment Bank agreed in 2020 to help to finance an upgrade of the urban transport system in Alexandria. The road network will be expanded under the supervision of the Egyptian Armed Forces Engineering Agency. Road projects will include the completion of the Rod el-Farag Axis Bridge across northern Cairo.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
4.1 5.2 66 63 10 8
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.
Egypt is playing catch-up with technological developments Egypt's technological readiness score improves for the forecast period from a low base, on the back of expected innovation driven by both the government and private ventures. The country's global and regional rankings rise by three and two places respectively. The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology will prioritise telecoms, digital citizenship, human capacity, industry development and innovation. To date, progress has been slow, as indicated by Egypt's low ranking in the World Intellectual Property Organisation's 2020 Global Innovation Index, at 96th of 131 countries. The main weakness for Egypt is in information and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure. But progress is being made in institutional capacity, market sophistication and business complexity, with the pandemic also increasing technology take-up.
The ICT sector is gaining increasing attention from the government
- The government envisages the technology sector as one of the main drivers of economic growth, including the development of new ICT investment clusters, such as a proposed technology valley in the Suez Canal Economic Zone. One of the largest projects in the zone is the construction of a plant to manufacture 60 km a year of fibre-optic cable by a joint venture including the Arab Organisation for Industrialisation, a military industrial group.
- According to the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development, the telecoms sector grew by 16% year on year in real terms in the first three quarters of 2020/21, following similar rates of growth in the previous two years. The rollout of 4G and improved data provision is helping to support growth in e-commerce and in the use of data services.
- The potential for growth in the technology sector has been highlighted by the success of Fawry, Egypt's leading fintech firm, whose market capitalisation reached US$1bn in August 2020, a year after its initial public offering. The shift to online shopping during the pandemic has boosted e-commerce.
- Egypt tested 5G mobile data during the Africa Cup of Nations in 2019, but a broader build-out will take some years, with those firms using hardware from the Chinese company, Huawei, likely to face political pressure from the US.

Economic forecast: Policy trends Major priorities in the short term will be the rollout of coronavirus vaccines and support for pandemic-affected workers. Post-pandemic policy will focus on promoting large infrastructure projects in areas such as transport, logistics and water desalination, aimed at enhancing longer-term productive capacity. Multilateral funding packages will support efforts to improve water and rail infrastructure and tackle rural underdevelopment, especially in Sinai. Egypt has built up a good relationship with the IMF, having successfully completed two programmes since 2019. Another IMF package is not expected over the forecast period, but Egypt will conserve the gains in macroeconomic stabilisation that were made under previous programmes (particularly those stemming from exchange rate liberalisation and inflation control). Other multilateral agencies will therefore remain engaged, providing soft loans for major infrastructure and logistics projects and for small and medium-sized enterprises, building on a track record of successful collaboration.
A policy of fiscal consolidation that predated the pandemic will be phased back in over the medium term, but the process is not being hurried. By official measures, unemployment fell from 9.3% in June 2020 to 7.3% a year later, but the provision of welfare and subsidies (the bill for which rose sharply during the pandemic) will be broadly unchanged in fiscal year 2021/22 (July-June). During Mr Sisi's presidency there has been a broad reduction in subsidies as a proportion of GDP, and over the medium term there will be an emphasis on distributing state resources more efficiently through means-tested social welfare programmes and cash transfers (lower bread subsidies have already been hinted at). However, popular expectations about state largesse make reducing the fiscal deficit a slow process, and public debt will remain high throughout the forecast period (at above 85% of GDP), undermining fiscal flexibility and Egypt's resilience to future shocks.
Political considerations will likewise complicate efforts to encourage the private sector to play a greater role in driving economic growth. The restructuring of loss-making state-owned firms will be impeded by political concerns over job losses, and the influence of vested interests, especially the business interests of the military, will remain strong. Direct monetary policies (including providing guarantees and setting minimums on commercial bank lending to small and medium-sized enterprises) are designed to enhance credit access for private businesses. However, the military and the state will dominate many of Egypt's most productive sectors over the forecast period, curbing the role of the private sector. As a result, gross fixed investment (averaging 15% of GDP in 2021-25) will remain well below the levels needed to put Egypt on a higher growth path.
Hydrocarbons will remain a government priority, with fresh licensing and exploration making some progress as global energy demand recovers modestly. Egypt will draw on regional ties to advance its role as an energy hub for the eastern Mediterranean and as a gas exporter, despite geopolitical constraints amid regional rivalry with Turkey, with energy output and exports growing markedly in 2021-25.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Government expenditure 27.2 28.3 29.1 28.7 28.6 27.9
Government revenue 19.3 20.2 21.7 22.8 23.2 22.6
Budget balance -7.9 -8.1 -7.4 -5.9 -5.4 -5.3
Government debt 88.1 92.0 94.0 91.7 88.4 85.2
Higher tax thresholds and tax breaks aimed at boosting disposable incomes and supporting businesses will dampen revenue growth in the near term. However, stronger economic growth and the eventual rollback of exemptions should increase the tax take as a proportion of GDP by the second half of the forecast period. Despite this, revenue growth will not match the ambitious pace targeted by the government. Value-added tax (VAT) earnings, which generate almost half of tax revenue, will recover, with a small rate increase from 14% likely in the middle of the forecast period. The government will leave the corporate tax rate unchanged at 22.5% in 2021/22 to encourage a recovery in investment, before raising it marginally later in the forecast period as it seeks to reduce the deficit. To limit political discontent, the government will increase transfer payments to the poorest, as well as public-sector wages and pensions, maintaining this burden on the public finances. Some industrial subsidies will be maintained in the short term-as will food subsidies, given rising global prices-but broader subsidy support will not be reintroduced and outlays will be wound down over the medium term.
Overall, we forecast that the fiscal deficit will narrow from an estimated 8.1% of GDP in 2020/21 to an average of 6% of GDP a year in 2021/22-2024/25, largely because of revenue gains. Financing the deficit will involve domestic borrowing and tapping multilateral and bilateral sources early in the forecast period, alongside ongoing sovereign bond issuance, driving the public debt/GDP ratio up to a peak of 94% at end-2021/22, with a decline in subsequent years (to 85% at end-2024/25) as the overall deficit narrows and the primary surplus widens.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Commercial bank lending rate (av) 11.4 9.5 10.4 10.7 10.7 10.6
3-month Treasury-bill rate (year-end) 13.1 13.4 13.5 13.8 13.8 14.0
The Central Bank of Egypt (CBE) cut its main policy rate by a cumulative 400 basis points in 2020, to 8.25%, and the rates on preferential loans for strategic sectors were lowered further. The interest-rate profile will remain stable in 2021, with inflation within the CBE's target range of 7% (+/-2 percentage points) and real GDP growth still restrained by the impact of the pandemic in 2020. Over the longer term the monetary outlook will remain relatively stable relative to 2016-20 as the CBE seeks to balance the need to revive private-sector credit with the risk of renewed capital outflows, currency volatility or a return to higher inflation. The policy rate will be raised in 2023 owing to the re-emergence of inflationary pressure, but will be held steady in 2024-25, given a more manageable inflation environment.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Economic growth (%)
US GDP -3.5 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.1
EU27 GDP growth -6.2 4.4 4.3 2.5 2.1 1.9
World GDP -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
World trade -8.1 8.9 5.7 4.8 4.3 4.1
Inflation indicators (%)
US CPI 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
EU27 CPI 0.6 2.1 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8
Manufactures (measured in US$) 0.2 7.6 1.8 1.5 2.0 2.5
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 2.9 32.0 -1.6 -0.7 -8.7 -0.1
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6
Exchange rate E£:US$ (av) 15.82 15.70 15.73 15.89 16.40 16.97
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP 3.6 3.3 4.4 5.3 5.7 5.2
Private consumption 7.3 3.2 5.1 5.3 5.7 4.6
Government consumption 6.7 2.3 3.0 2.7 3.4 4.0
Gross fixed investment -20.2 2.0 7.9 10.0 9.5 9.0
Exports of goods & services -21.7 9.7 12.4 10.5 10.0 9.3
Imports of goods & services -17.9 8.4 15.6 10.4 10.3 7.7
Domestic demand 2.5 3.0 5.3 5.7 6.1 5.2
Agriculture 3.3 2.5 3.0 2.8 3.2 4.0
Industry 2.0 3.8 4.4 5.0 5.2 4.5
Services 2.8 3.1 4.7 6.0 6.6 6.0
Given government support for major projects and a strong pick-up in goods exports, we estimate that the economy grew by 3.3% in 2020/21. We expect real GDP growth to quicken to 4.4% in 2021/22 as global demand returns to pre-pandemic levels and new energy projects gain momentum, delivering strong goods export growth. However, pandemic-related global headwinds will continue to hinder several sectors. Tourism, which accounts for about 9.5% of employment and 5.5% of GDP, will remain severely affected by international travel restrictions, slow vaccine rollout in some leading markets and Egypt's own slow vaccination programme. Multilateral backing will support public capital spending, but investment will remain below potential (reflecting constraints on the private sector). The construction and energy sectors will be the main engines of growth in the middle of the forecast period. The government is pursuing low-income housing schemes, supported by special CBE lending facilities, and development of a new (administrative) capital city east of Cairo, the capital, will continue.
The tourism sector will revive later in the forecast period. Confidence in hard-currency availability will recover and attract foreign investors from 2022, boosting productive capacity. With growth becoming broader based and unemployment falling, consumer spending growth should accelerate in 2022-25. Development of hydrocarbons resources and processing capabilities is likely to boost long-term export expansion, with annual average real GDP growth forecast at 5.4% in 2022/23-2024/25.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends The manufacturing sector, which includes oil refining, accounts for about 15% of real GDP, but the challenges facing the sector are numerous. Local manufacturing suffers from quality issues and is often unable to match competition from imported goods. The competitiveness of export-oriented manufactured goods has been undermined by a spike in the costs of imported intermediate goods and raw materials. Many industries were forced to cut back production in 2020, owing to the pandemic, and this was reflected in a 15% average quarterly contraction in manufacturing GDP on a year-on-year basis between April and December 2020. Output also contracted by 7.3% year on year in January-March 2021, but there were signs of a robust recovery the following quarter. Energy-intensive industries such as steel, aluminium, cement and ceramics have enjoyed a competitive advantage since late 2020 as domestic natural gas prices fell below international levels, whereas in 2019 and in the first half of 2020 they were higher. The oil-refining segment is set to grow rapidly in the next few years, with the completion of upgrades to a series of refineries. There are also prospects for growth in the petrochemicals sector. The building materials industry has benefited from demand for government-initiated construction and infrastructure, but the entry of military entities into this industry in recent years risks distorting this market. The government has embarked on a restructuring programme for the state-owned segment of the textiles industry, with the aim of increasing productivity through mergers, asset sales and investment in new equipment.
The outlook for the oil and gas sector is broadly positive, owing to substantial investments coming on stream from international oil companies (IOCs). Because of political instability, production in both sectors declined, and government debt owed to IOCs built up in the aftermath of the 2011 uprising. However, the natural gas industry has staged a vigorous recovery since 2015 boosted by large gas discoveries in the eastern Mediterranean, ongoing exploration in other areas including the Red Sea, and Egypt's efforts to develop its processing capabilities to act as a regional natural gas hub. IOCs remain strongly committed to Egypt, and have recently been encouraged by the surge in global natural gas prices as new supply has lagged behind growth in demand. Arrears owed to IOCs for contracted gas purchases have fallen below US$1bn from a peak of above US$6bn, and the government has provided more attractive terms for exploration and production.
The leading operators in Egypt's energy sector, Italy's Eni and the UK's BP, have reached plateau production for their largest developments-Zohr and West Nile Delta, respectively-and are planning to develop fresh discoveries off the eastern coast of the Delta in the next few years. The US majors ExxonMobil and Chevron have also taken on exploration blocks in Egypt's western Mediterranean offshore sector, and Chevron has secured one of the two blocks awarded in the Red Sea, in an inaugural bid round for this area. Egypt reined in its natural gas production in mid-2020 owing to the weakness of the global liquefied natural gas (LNG) market, but as prices recovered from October onwards and into 2021 it seized the opportunity to ramp up exports from the Idku LNG terminal and, from February 2021, the Damietta terminal, which had lain dormant since 2012. The two LNG export terminals are also likely to start processing Israeli gas during the forecast period. Adding Cypriot gas to this mix will depend on whether the tensions in the eastern Mediterranean arising from Turkey's maritime claims can be resolved. Egypt's own gas consumption declined slightly in 2019, owing mainly to the increased efficiency of newly commissioned power stations, and there was a further decline of 2.2% in 2020, related to the impact of the pandemic on economic activity. Given high population growth and recovering economic performance, gas consumption is likely to grow even with the inroads made by renewable sources and efficiency measures, but we expect Egypt to continue to have a surplus of natural gas supply over demand during the forecast period. Oil production is likely to continue to decline, as most of the main fields have reached maturity, but the upgrades to the refining sector will allow for a reduction in petroleum products imports, even though crude oil imports will increase.
The non-oil mining sector is also likely to show strong growth in the forecast period following a new law that replaces the oil-based production-sharing model with a tax and royalty scheme. Prospects for further development of gold resources in the Eastern Desert are highly promising, and several new concessions were awarded following a late 2020 bid round.
The services sector-another major employer and traditionally a significant component of the economy-has experienced repeated setbacks. Tourism suffered a prolonged slump after the downing of a Russian airliner over Sinai by militants in October 2015, and the sector was hit hard once more in early 2020 by the pandemic. The recovery after the Sinai crash started to gain momentum in 2018, and in 2019 arrivals rose to 13m, the highest since 2010; the sector contributed US$13bn to the current account in 2019, according to the Central Bank of Egypt. However, following the outbreak of Covid-19, the government closed Egypt to foreign tourists between March and July 2020. The sector accounts for 10-15% of GDP and provides employment for about 3m Egyptians. The impact of the pandemic and the associated travel restrictions and requirements in key markets has continued for much of 2021, and a full recovery to pre-coronavirus levels is unlikely before 2023. Other important components of services, including the financial services, healthcare and information and communications technology (ICT) sectors, will continue to be strong drivers of growth during the forecast period.
Construction and transport are likely to continue to be among the fastest-growing sectors. These sectors have been affected by the pandemic (with a brief slowdown in construction caused by pandemic restrictions, but also by concerns about surplus demand), but to a lesser degree than in other areas of the economy. Projects such as the new administrative capital and 13 other satellite cities under development will underpin strong growth in the construction and building materials sectors. The first phase of the new capital is nearing completion, with government ministries set to begin moving there in late 2021 and public housing to accommodate civil servants being built in the city and surrounding neighbourhoods. Private developers are building new residential and commercial areas. The main foreign participant is the China State Construction and Engineering Corporation, which is building the central business district. The new capital has generated a number of major transport schemes, notably a new monorail system that will link it to Cairo, and that will include a line from Cairo to the 6th of October City industrial and residential area to the south-west. The government is also promoting investment in logistics, including a series of inland dry ports to be carried out on a public-private partnership basis.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Consumer prices 5.1 5.5 5.9 5.0 5.1 5.2
A strong near-term outlook for the Egyptian pound will act as an anchor for inflation in 2021. However, price growth will rise to an average of 5.5% this year (from 5.1% in 2020), given rising global commodity prices, higher transport costs and a reopening of the economy. In 2022 the impact on demand of a new minimum wage for the private sector (introduced in 2021) and a pick-up in real GDP growth will be partly offset by a slower rate of increase in world commodity prices, with inflation expected to average 5.9%. In 2023-25 we forecast that inflation will average 5.1% a year. The impact of slight currency weakening and rising consumer demand will broadly be offset by a stabilisation of, and subsequent slide in, commodity import prices.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Exchange rate E£:US$ (av) 15.82 15.70 15.73 15.89 16.40 16.97
Exchange rate E£:US$ (end-period) 15.75 15.72 15.75 16.14 16.68 17.24
Exchange rate E£:€ (av) 18.05 18.75 18.40 18.23 19.27 20.62
Real effective exchange-rate index (2010=100; av) 105.1 105.8 110.3 112.7 110.9 108.7
Purchasing power parity E£:US$ (av) 4.51 4.62 4.71 4.85 4.97 5.14
Egypt will broadly maintain a free float (introduced in 2016) throughout the forecast period. The Egyptian pound will be less volatile in 2021 than in 2020, with investment inflows being a crucial support. We expect the currency to end 2021 at E£15.72:US$1. In 2022 gas exports and a supportive interest-rate environment will put a floor under the currency, which we expect to remain broadly stable. However, real effective exchange rate appreciation (REER) has been ongoing since 2018 and is expected to cause the nominal exchange rate to adjust noticeably from 2023 as the trade deficit remains wide and global monetary conditions gently tighten, with the pound weakening to E£17.24:US$1 by end-2025. However, REER is expected to remain strong (even by recent standards) owing to enduring demand for Egyptian assets, leaving the pound subject to a more sudden correction if inward capital flows reverse sharply.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Current-account balance -14.23 -19.16 -20.61 -21.40 -17.69 -9.44
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -3.7 -4.6 -4.5 -4.3 -3.3 -1.6
Goods: exports fob 25.05 32.00 35.91 38.72 41.78 47.44
Goods: imports fob -62.01 -77.61 -84.93 -91.11 -92.41 -91.87
Trade balance -36.96 -45.61 -49.02 -52.38 -50.63 -44.44
Services: credit 15.05 17.05 19.89 22.07 23.80 25.12
Services: debit -10.47 -11.02 -12.32 -13.16 -13.90 -14.15
Services balance 4.58 6.04 7.57 8.91 9.90 10.96
Primary income: credit 0.54 1.12 1.28 1.29 1.46 1.59
Primary income: debit -11.55 -11.70 -13.22 -13.77 -14.41 -15.38
Primary income balance -11.01 -10.58 -11.94 -12.48 -12.96 -13.79
Secondary income: credit 30.04 31.99 33.88 35.77 37.32 39.24
Secondary income: debit -0.88 -1.00 -1.11 -1.22 -1.31 -1.41
Secondary income balance 29.16 30.99 32.77 34.55 36.00 37.83
REER appreciation and the reopening of the economy will drive up import demand in 2021, widening the trade deficit from 9.6% of GDP in 2020 to 10.9% of GDP. The shortfall will then steadily narrow, to 7.7% of GDP in 2025. Robust private consumption growth and public capital investment will push up import spending (as will REER in 2021-23), but export earnings from gas will also increase, particularly from 2022.
The services balance will remain in structural surplus, which will widen as a proportion of GDP in the second half of the forecast period in line with a more marked revival of tourism receipts. Profit repatriation (resulting from foreign ownership of major hydrocarbons projects) and rising interest payments will keep the primary income balance in deficit, although this will be more than outweighed by a large secondary income surplus stemming from inward remittances and official transfers. Overall, the current account deficit will widen in 2021, to 4.6% of GDP, but narrow over the remainder of the forecast period, to 1.6% of GDP in 2025. The deficit will be financed by robust inward portfolio and, to a lesser extent, direct investment.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Egypt Stocks and flows The government changed its methodology for assessing foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows in July 2018 to include all undistributed realised earnings (whereas previously it only counted reinvested earnings); this has raised the total FDI inflow level. According to Central Bank of Egypt data, inflows of FDI fell to US$5.9bn in 2020, as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, after averaging about US$8bn a year since 2016, with an uptick to US$9bn in 2019. Meanwhile, the stock of inward FDI, which more than doubled in 2005-09, grew more slowly in 2010-14 amid heightened political and economic uncertainty; as IMF-led structural reforms and changes to FDI regulation have bedded in, and the value of the capital stock has stabilised, the FDI stock has grown more robustly, reaching US$132.5bn in 2020, 40.5% higher than in 2015, although its share of GDP, at 36%, is lower than at the start of the historical period, reflecting rapid growth in nominal GDP. However, The Economist Intelligence Unit expects there to be a relatively rapid recovery as a result of the momentum that had previously been built up in sectors such as natural gas, infrastructure, mining and telecommunications. The government's efforts to improve the environment for foreign investors through new legislation passed in 2017 did not immediately have the desired result, as the oil and gas sector, which was not covered by these laws, continued to account for the bulk of FDI inflows. The government has since sought to address some of the flaws that investors have highlighted in the legislation, and it has made an effort to streamline the decision-making process by abolishing the Ministry of Investment and enhancing the powers of the head of the General Authority for Investment, who now reports directly to the prime minister. The increased role of the military establishment in the economy will have a mixed impact on FDI. On the one hand, it will deter investors from sectors in which military entities are perceived to have a competitive advantage, but, on the other hand, some investors will be content to form joint ventures with military agencies in the hope that this will give them a competitive edge and some certainty over the security of their investments. We expect a recovery in inward FDI-initially fairly slow, reflecting global economic weakness-during the forecast period, reflecting improvements in the business environment and a wider availability of hard currency to meet business needs. We also forecast that outward direct investment will increase during the forecast period as healthier liquidity levels and easing foreign-exchange shortages enable companies to expand their overseas operations.
Origin and distribution European investors have accounted for about two-thirds of total inward FDI flows to Egypt during the past five years, and the US and Arab countries have supplied most of the remainder. Italy, the UK and the Netherlands have consistently figured among the largest sources of FDI, reflecting the scale of the investments by Eni, BP and Shell in the oil and gas sector in recent years. The UAE, which is Egypt's closest regional ally, has been the largest source of investment among Arab countries, by a significant margin, followed by Saudi Arabia and Qatar, with Qatar seen as a particular source of potential growth following the ending of the Arab quartet's boycott of Qatar in January 2021. Chinese companies have shown increasing interest in investing in Egypt. The most recent central bank data showed Chinese investment worth about US$360m during the first three quarters of 2020/21, compared with an annual average of about US$200m in the preceding three years. Oil and gas has typically accounted for about 60% of FDI inflows, but we expect its share to diminish in the forecast period, while flows into infrastructure, technology, financial services, mining, healthcare and real estate will increase.
Determinants Besides market size and the availability of cheap labour, the main determinants of FDI include the business and legal environment and the availability of foreign exchange for imports and profit repatriation. Under the current regime, the government is seeking to resolve a number of long-running disputes with Gulf Arab (and other foreign) investors, as part of a broader effort to encourage regional players to increase their activity in Egypt. Efforts to establish new free zones-such as the Suez Canal Development Zone-could help to court investments, and the Sovereign Fund of Egypt established in 2018 has been designed as a channel for FDI. Downside risks to FDI will persist. These include business environment deficiencies, weak lending by domestic banks and the risk of the post-pandemic recovery stalling.
Impact Increased FDI has helped to transform Egypt into a more modern market economy. Foreign firms are aiding economic diversification, improving the quality of human capital through better managerial and technical skills, increasing employment opportunities and assisting the transfer of technology. Egypt has a growing base of technology entrepreneurs who have the potential to create new jobs and investment opportunities. One recent example is Swivl, a transportation app founded by Egyptians that is in the process of securing a Nasdaq listing. Investment into the technology sector will bring international expertise into the field, strengthening its long-term growth potential. Similarly, Egypt's well-established healthcare and pharmaceutical sector is likely to draw in investment, in particular, allowing the expansion of domestic manufacturing capabilities, including for the production of Covid-19 vaccines.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2015 2020 2025
Population (m)
Total 89.0 100.6 110.0
 Male 45.0 50.8 55.6
 Female 44.0 49.8 54.4
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 33.1 33.6 33.3
 15-64 62.8 61.9 61.7
 65+ 4.1 4.4 5.0
Young-age dependency ratio 0.53 0.54 0.54
Old-age dependency ratio 0.07 0.07 0.08
Working-age population (m) 55.9 62.3 67.8
Urbanisation (% of total) 42.8 42.7 42.7
Labour force (m) 28.0 28.5 32.7
       
Period averages   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth (%)   2.5 1.8
Working-age population growth (%)   2.2 1.7
Labour force growth (%)   0.4 2.8
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   27.5 24.8
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   5.9 5.8
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   18.3 15.5
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   69.2 69.9
 Female   73.7 74.6
 Average   71.4 72.2
Sources: International Labour Organisation; The Economist Intelligence Unit; national statistics.
Egypt's population will reach 110m by the end of the forecast period Egypt's growing population provides opportunities for economic development but is also among the biggest challenges facing the government, as it places additional strains on the labour market and public services such as healthcare and education. The Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts that the population will rise from 100.6m in 2020 to 110m in 2025, an annual growth rate of 1.8%-higher than the average for most developing countries but lower than in 2016-20 in part because of the return in 2020 of expatriate workers from the Gulf and from Jordan (almost 10m Egyptians reside abroad), affected by the coronavirus pandemic. Rural areas will experience higher growth rates than urban centres. The slower growth rate reflects our expectation that recent family-planning campaigns and the high cost of living since the 2016 currency flotation will reduce fertility rates.
Almost one-third of the population is below the age of 15, and more than half is below 24. About 700,000 new entrants join the labour market annually, and unemployment rose in the wake of the 2011 uprising, as real GDP growth averaged well below the 6-7% required to absorb the growing labour force. Since 2014 the unemployment rate has fallen from a peak of over 13% to below 8% by early 2020. The pandemic resulted in heavy job losses in mid-2020 pushing the official unemployment rate above 9.6%. The underlying situation was even worse as there was a large-scale withdrawal of women from the labour force. The unemployment rate for men rose from 4.5% to 8.5% but the female unemployment rate fell to 16.3% from 21.9% as many women gave up searching for work. The unemployment rate fell to 7.3% in the third quarter of 2020, and it remained at about this level until mid-2021. However, the size of the labour force is still roughly the same as the pre-pandemic level, and the labour participation rate at 41.9% in March 2021, compared with 42.7% at end-2019, is lower. Government efforts to address unemployment have failed to tackle deep structural shortcomings and the lack of opportunities, particularly for younger graduates. The outlet of seeking work overseas will also be constrained in the medium term by the effects of the global pandemic.
Outward migration to the Gulf states, Europe and North America will fall Outward migration from Egypt to neighbouring Gulf Arab states, Europe and North America is likely to resume, but the pandemic means that there will be fewer opportunities in these areas. Hundreds of thousands of Egyptians were forced to return home from the Gulf during 2020. Expatriate remittances are among the major sources of foreign-exchange receipts for Egypt. Even before the pandemic, migrating to the oil-rich Gulf Arab states was becoming increasingly difficult, as these countries have stepped up their programmes to increase the proportion of their own nationals in the workforce. Similarly, public opinion in Europe and North America is turning increasingly against economic migrants, which is likely to be reflected in tighter immigration rules and restrictions on foreign labour inflows.
Poverty rate continues to rise Other consequences of Egypt's recent political and economic turbulence include a rise in the rate of poverty after 2011. According to the results of the most recent household survey by the Central Agency for Public Mobilisation and Statistics, the poverty rate in mid-2020 was 29.7%. This was lower than the rate of 32.5% in the survey for fiscal year 2017/18 (July-June) but higher than the rate of 27.8% in the previous, 2014/15 survey. The sharp depreciation in the Egyptian pound and the spike in inflation that followed 2016 currency flotation squeezed household spending power, but as inflation eased and the govern-ment increased the minimum wage in 2019, the poverty rate started to come down. The median annual net income rose to E£69,100 (US$4,370) in mid-2020, 15% higher than in mid-2018. Strong increases in the private consumption component of real GDP in 2020 and 2021 have indicated that the effects of the pandemic on household spending have not been as severe as might have been expected. One mitigating factor has been an increase in remittances.
Egypt has a highly urbanised population, with nearly 10m people living in Cairo alone. The current government has taken steps to promote internal migration from the overcrowded Nile Valley into unpopulated tracts of desert. These include a demarcation plan to create three new governorates-Central Sinai, Al Alamein and Al Wahat-bringing the total to 30. The government is also undertaking a number of major industrial projects outside urban centres, such as the Suez Canal Development Zone, with the aim of boosting employ-ment opportunities in the long-neglected rural areas. The government has embarked on the construction of 14 new satellite cities. The largest of these is the new administrative capital, where some government ministries have relocated and which is envisaged as eventually housing some 6m people.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Population (m) 100.6 102.4 104.3 106.1 108.0 110.0
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 368 401 435 478 512 549
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 3,658 3,913 4,175 4,504 4,742 4,991
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 1,290 1,362 1,453 1,568 1,691 1,813
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 12,825 13,302 13,938 14,772 15,653 16,482
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 326 361 397 434 463 489
Household consumption (US$ bn) 316 346 379 412 437 459
Household consumption per head (US$) 3,140 3,380 3,640 3,880 4,050 4,180
Exports of goods & services (% change) -21.7 9.7 12.4 10.5 10.0 9.3
Imports of goods & services (% change) -17.9 8.4 15.6 10.4 10.3 7.7
The pandemic slowed the recovery in incomes but did not halt it Purchasing power has increased since 2019 as a result of falling inflation and increased wages, slowed only marginally by the pandemic. The recovery in consumer sentiment came after a long period of suppressed demand owing to falling real wages. Without the pandemic, the increase in consumer spending may have been even stronger, but The Economist Intelligence Unit forecast that household consumption per head will grow by almost 8% in US dollar terms in 2021. We expect the rate of growth in household consumption per head to taper down gradually over the remainder of the forecast period, to about 3.2% in 2025. Egypt's GDP per head is expected to climb to US$4,991 in 2025 from US$3,658 in 2020, although this will remain low by regional standards. Even with the pandemic slowing the recovery in income per head in the short term, as the most populous country in the Middle East and North Africa, Egypt's large size makes it an important regional market, with huge potential (particularly in the second half of the forecast period) that will continue to grow over the long term. The population is easily accessible, not least because it is located in an extremely concentrated geographical area. However, the headline figures mask wide income disparities between rich and poor.
Wide income disparities remain Nevertheless, the spending power of a sizeable minority of the population, who reside mainly in newly built cities and neighbourhoods such as 6th of October City, is comparable to that of consumers in the industrialised world. They have been less affected than lower-paid Egyptians by the pandemic and retain substantial disposable income; beyond the uncertainty of the pandemic period they will be willing to spend it on consumer goods. Historically, there have been high levels of inequality, with increases in the poverty rate in 2014-18, which have only recently begun to partly reverse, likely to have intensified this polarisation. Nevertheless, multilateral-backed poverty reduction programmes and a return to average economic growth of about 5% will ensure robust private consumption growth. In addition to high levels of consumption by wealthier Egyptians, purchasing power will improve across a wider swathe of the population, although large disparities will remain. However, there is a risk that these gains could be undermined by rising inflation.
Retail markets are still underdeveloped Egypt's retail markets have seen only moderate investment since 2011, which means that the market is under-saturated, and assets are under-priced. This could provide investment opportunities, but prospective investors are likely to wait until they have made a thorough assessment of the impact of the pandemic on consumer behaviour, with e-commerce finally beginning to gain substantial ground. New urban developments will also provide abundant opportunities for retail investment.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 120,392 131,766 143,362 153,497 160,186 165,227
Housing & household fuels 59,915 62,815 65,695 68,395 69,596 69,844
Clothing & footwear 11,801 12,599 13,299 13,854 14,200 14,410
Household goods & services 11,933 12,899 13,913 14,805 15,419 15,880
Health 28,749 32,355 36,295 40,108 43,263 45,980
Transport & communications 33,143 38,672 43,925 49,046 53,318 57,520
Leisure & education 22,159 23,532 26,103 29,817 33,250 36,576
Hotels & restaurants 13,795 15,423 16,717 18,336 19,975 21,452
Other 13,858 16,302 19,928 23,976 28,125 32,525
Total 315,745 346,364 379,237 411,834 437,334 459,414
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 38.1 38.0 37.8 37.3 36.6 36.0
Housing & household fuels 19.0 18.1 17.3 16.6 15.9 15.2
Clothing & footwear 3.7 3.6 3.5 3.4 3.2 3.1
Household goods & services 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.6 3.5 3.5
Health 9.1 9.3 9.6 9.7 9.9 10.0
Transport & communications 10.5 11.2 11.6 11.9 12.2 12.5
Leisure & education 7.0 6.8 6.9 7.2 7.6 8.0
Hotels & restaurants 4.4 4.5 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7
Other 4.4 4.7 5.3 5.8 6.4 7.1
In common with the rest of the region, spending on food, beverages and tobacco accounts for the largest share of consumer expenditure, and this will remain the case throughout the forecast period. Spending on basic household items, primarily food and beverages, as well as spending on housing, will continue dominate household expenditure during the forecast period, but with a gradual reduction in the share of total spending. We expect spending on healthcare to increase, reflecting the impact of the rollout of the universal health insurance scheme, and there will also be a significant rise in spending on leisure and education. The predominance of spending on food reflects the fact that a substantial chunk of the population will remain at or just above the poverty line, with disposable income sufficient only for subsistence; poverty rates rose over much of the historical period (2016-20), although they started to fall in fiscal year 2019/20 (July-June) and are likely to continue to decline in the forecast period, translating into a slow shift in spending patterns among some groups.
In the long run, demand for higher-end consumer goods will be underpinned by rising incomes, employment and population growth. Demand for more sophisticated, foreign-produced electrical goods is certain to grow, not least because of mistrust of the quality of locally produced goods. Transport and communications will increase in importance as the forecast period progresses. As car ownership rises and demand for mobile and internet technology takes off, a rising proportion of household income will be spent on these items.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2020   2025  
  Egypt MEA (av) a Egypt MEA (av) a
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 5.2 6.1 5.2 6.0
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 188 372 265 457
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 17.1 38.2 15.0 34.2
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 38.1 -24.8 36.0 33.1
Meat consumption (kg per person) 33.5 29.4 36.5 30.6
Milk consumption (litres per person) 65.0 40.1 68.1 41.5
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 1.7 1.1 1.8 1.2
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 59 72 65 74
Telephone main lines 98 53 147 60
Mobile phone subscribers 948 1,110 1,070 1,180
Television sets 442 – 530 –
Personal computers 673 302 775 291
Households
No. of households (m) 26.5 100.3 30.6 115.9
No. of people per household (av) 3.8 4.2 3.6 4.0
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 10,260 20,870 13,310 24,610
Average monthly wage (US$) 369 – 521 –
Gini index 31.5 b – – –
a Middle East and Africa. b Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation; Euromonitor; World Health Organisation; national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union; The Economist Intelligence Unit.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population 1.69 1.41 1.50
Working-age population 1.98 1.50 1.66
Working-age minus total population 0.30 0.09 0.16
Labour force 2.88 2.26 2.47
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 2.6 2.1 2.3
Growth of real GDP 4.4 3.6 3.8
Labour productivity growth 1.4 1.3 1.3
Growth of capital stock 4.4 3.9 4.1
Total factor productivity growth 1.6 0.7 1.0
Initial conditions: Egypt began addressing decades-old market distortions in 2016, backed by significant external financial support, which has been broadly sustained with fresh multilateral support during the coronavirus pandemic and ensuing economic instability. The government has retained the policies adopted since 2016-centred on economic liberalisation and rationalising the public finances-but progress has been slow at times. Moreover, the public finances and the external debt position have been further stretched during the pandemic, which has slowed fiscal and public debt correction. Nonetheless, the agreement reached with the IMF in 2016 and the subsequent economic policy changes have helped to shore up investor confidence in the economy, and this has been further reinforced by the extent of renewed IMF and other multilateral and bilateral support that Egypt has received to cope with the shock to domestic and external finances caused by the pandemic. The economy is diversified, and the abundance of cheap labour, coupled with its large market size, means that Egypt still has huge potential over the long term, although the large and still rapidly growing population also poses serious infrastructure and social stability challenges.
Demographic trends: Egypt's high population density has some advantages: access to consumers is relatively easy, especially in the two urban centres, Cairo and Alexandria. Overall population growth will begin to slow, owing to higher levels of development and government family-planning policies, but will remain high. Demographic trends are broadly favourable to growth prospects, in that the working-age population will continue to rise more rapidly than the overall population throughout the forecast period owing to the youthful demographic bulge. However, this will also add to the burden on public services such as education and healthcare. The government will press ahead with projects to develop areas of the desert beyond the Nile Valley to alleviate pressure on infrastructure. This will be supported by the government's efforts to reclaim 1.5m feddans (630,000 ha) of land. With most of the land surface uninhabited, the government will push ahead with long-awaited plans to create a number of new governorates, an idea that was first mooted in 2005 and later revived by the president, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, in late 2014, who has since pushed forward with major urban construction projects, including a new administrative capital.
External conditions: External conditions will remain dependent on demand from key export markets in North America and the EU-Egypt's largest trading partner. These have been heavily affected by the pandemic, but in the longer term should be restored to growth, especially with the US. The broader region is also embroiled in political and security turmoil, which will continue to dampen investment sentiment across the Middle East as a whole. Tensions with Turkey will remain a concern, particularly in terms of Egypt's ambitions to leverage its growing natural gas resource capacity and processing facilities to solidify its role as a regional energy hub, but despite these concerns, this will be an important area of growth and co-operation with countries such as Israel, Cyprus, Greece and elsewhere in southern Europe. Moreover, Egypt and Turkey are currently engaged in efforts to resolve their differences. Over the longer term, economic recovery in Europe and the US should translate into higher inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) as well as growing exports. Similarly, reliance on financial assistance should decline gradually as structural reforms put the economy back on a sustainable footing.
Institutions and policy trends: The present and future governments will work to streamline the bureaucracy and boost the accountability of public officials. They will also look to downsize the bloated public sector, which means that private-sector participation in the economy and attracting FDI will be key to developing the country's infrastructure and improving public services. However, such reforms will be slow and protracted, largely as a result of the presence of deeply entrenched interest groups in the government and the powerful influence of business lobby groups and of the military on the state. Moreover, democratic accountability will stay low with authority centred on the presidency. Threats to long-term political and social stability may persist, reflecting the stand-off between the state and its liberal opponents, as well as high unemployment rates and high levels of poverty.
Long-term performance: There is significant potential for strong real GDP growth over the long term. Egypt is a prime location as a base to export to Asia, Africa and Europe and has a plentiful and low-cost workforce. However, success will also depend on an ongoing commitment to economic reform and to major improvements in political and institutional effectiveness. The government must increase the efficiency of the bureaucracy; develop a more effective commercial legal system; continue to withdraw the state from economic activity; and reform the public finances. Progress is likely to be patchy, but The Economist Intelligence Unit expects real GDP growth to average 4.4% a year in 2021-30 and 3.8% in 2021-50, with labour productivity growth helping to offset slower population growth.
Income and market size
  2020 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 100.6 118.9 157.5
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 368.0 907.1 4,231.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 3,660 7,630 26,870
Private consumption (US$ bn) 315.7 745.2 3,470.6
Private consumption per head (US$) 3,140 6,270 22,040
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 1,290.2 2,459.2 7,517.4
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 12,830 20,670 47,740
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 48.5 195.9 1,303.9
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 76.5 264.0 1,557.2
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 20.3 21.9 26.1
Share of world population (%) 1.3 1.4 1.7
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.4 0.6 1.1
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.0 0.0 0.0
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 0.2 0.4 1.0
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability Egypt has been struggling with rising temperatures in recent years, with summer heat typically averaging above 35˚C. This results in spikes in energy consumption during the hot summer season by both households and industrial users. However, successive heat waves and worsening climate conditions globally could create new health dangers for residents of the country, as well as the broader Middle East and North Africa region-particularly as the summer season lengthens, humidity levels rise further and growing water scarcity causes problems for food production, industry and municipal use. This may also reduce arable land in Egypt, which is already facing the threat of worsening water scarcity as construction and the filling of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (located on the Nile, downstream in Ethiopia) is completed in the coming years; Egypt is especially concerned that Ethiopia has not agreed to terms that will dictate water filling according to hydrological and climatic conditions. In addition to continuing to seek an agreement on these issues, Egypt will accelerate efforts to develop other water sources, especially desalination, with plans for several new desalination facilities over the next few years. The impact that higher air temperatures and humidity will have in reducing the ability of the human body to cool off through sweating is likely to lower the productivity of workers involved in construction and other outdoor activities (even at night). All of this will boost demand for energy further as time goes by and weather conditions deteriorate. The government is increasingly looking to renewable sources, especially solar, to meet power demand and is also beginning work on nuclear energy provision, but remains heavily dependent on natural gas. As part of managing the greater demand for energy, local authorities will need to diversify the energy mix to include more renewable sources of power.
In 2019 The Economist Intelligence Unit developed a model to calculate the impact of climate change on long-term growth and projects that the Egyptian economy will be 5.5% smaller in 2050 than it would have been without this hit to growth.
Technological developments The government envisages the technology sector as being one of the main drivers of economic growth over the next five years, including the development of new information and communications technology (ICT) investment clusters, for example a proposed technology valley in the Suez Canal Economic Zone. Telecommunications and the ICT sector have grown rapidly in recent years as 4G rollout has accelerated. Future growth is highly likely, considering the growing interest by foreigners in Egypt as a budding offshore IT centre. Indeed, despite the modest performance by regional comparison, Egypt has been gaining increasing attention by foreign companies as an outsourcing centre for IT operations-owing in part to the abundance of skilled workers and the country's proximity to European markets. Several already large local technology companies have grown considerably during the pandemic, which has increased attention on technology solutions.
There are currently more than 6,000 Egyptian companies active in the ICT sector, most of them in activities related to the internet. E-commerce and financial technology (fintech) have grown strongly during the pandemic crisis, albeit from a low base. The government estimates that Egypt earns about US$1.5bn a year from exports of ICT-related services, and this figure is likely to climb significantly in the long term. ICT accounted for about 4% of GDP in fiscal year 2018/19 (July-June), according to the government, which is planning for it to reach 5% of GDP in 2021/22, targeting 12% growth a year in the sector. Exports of digital services have also grown strongly. The government is rolling out e-government services for households in select areas; internet penetration is still fairly modest, although it is used in the business sector more widely. The number of internet users has risen strongly in recent years, with the government estimating that almost 70% of individuals were using the internet on a daily basis by early 2020, according to Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (MCIT) data, a trend that intensified during the closures wrought by the pandemic in 2020. Following rapid growth in digital take-up during the pandemic, more than half of households had fixed broadband access to the internet by mid-2021, compared with about 20% a decade earlier, and about 60% of households used mobile broadband (nearly all households have access to a mobile phone). Household home internet coverage in urban areas is far higher (about 70%) than in rural areas (about 50%) where improved mobile services could play a particularly important role. The number of mobile internet subscriptions grew by 42.8% year on year in mid-2021, according to MCIT data, while ADSL subscribers grew by 18.9% and USB modem subscriptions by 42.1% over the same period. Internet bandwidth is also growing, but at a slower pace than the number of subscribers over the past year, although bandwidth growth should eventually catch up with the jump in technology adoption during the pandemic.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 2.5 3.2 2.9 2.3 -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
EU27 GDP growth 2.0 2.9 2.1 1.7 -6.2 4.4 4.3 2.5 2.1 1.9
Middle East and North Africa growth 4.8 1.2 0.8 0.8 -3.7 3.3 4.2 3.4 2.7 2.1
World trade growth 2.1 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 8.9 5.7 4.8 4.3 4.1
US CPI 1.3 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
EU27 CPI 0.2 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.1 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8
Manufactures export price -2.2 1.9 5.1 -1.4 0.2 7.6 1.8 1.5 2.0 2.5
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 44.0 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3
US$:€ (av) 1.11 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
¥:€ (av) 120.4 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 130.3 130.1 128.6 132.8 135.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, current market prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Expenditure on GDP (E£ bn at current market prices)
GDP 2,709.4 3,470.0 4,437.4 5,322.3 5,820.0 6,291.2 6,847.4 7,596.2 8,403.1 9,315.1
Private consumption 2,251.2 3,012.7 3,791.6 4,396.7 4,993.5 5,437.9 5,965.4 6,544.0 7,172.3 7,796.3
Government consumption 309.6 350.2 370.6 407.7 463.9 500.7 546.1 588.7 639.5 702.7
Gross fixed investment 392.0 514.3 721.1 922.5 796.4 865.5 980.6 1,132.6 1,302.2 1,490.3
Exports of goods & services 280.3 565.6 839.2 931.4 767.3 972.7 1,166.8 1,357.7 1,591.5 1,858.0
Imports of goods & services 539.2 988.5 1,303.1 1,371.3 1,209.1 1,495.6 1,827.5 2,044.8 2,321.4 2,553.2
Stockbuilding 15.5 15.7 18.0 17.5 8.0 9.0 15.0 17.0 18.0 20.0
Domestic demand 2,968.3 3,892.9 4,901.3 5,744.4 6,261.8 6,813.1 7,507.0 8,282.3 9,132.0 10,009.3
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 269.1 194.5 249.1 316.4 368.0 400.7 435.3 478.0 512.4 548.9
Private consumption 223.6 168.9 212.8 261.4 315.7 346.4 379.2 411.8 437.3 459.4
Government consumption 30.7 19.6 20.8 24.2 29.3 31.9 34.7 37.0 39.0 41.4
Gross fixed investment 38.9 28.8 40.5 54.8 50.4 55.1 62.3 71.3 79.4 87.8
Exports of goods & services 27.8 31.7 47.1 55.4 48.5 62.0 74.2 85.4 97.0 109.5
Imports of goods & services 53.5 55.4 73.1 81.5 76.5 95.3 116.2 128.7 141.6 150.5
Stockbuilding 1.5 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.6 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.2
Domestic demand 294.8 218.2 275.1 341.5 395.9 434.0 477.2 521.2 556.8 589.8
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 83.1 86.8 85.4 82.6 85.8 86.4 87.1 86.1 85.4 83.7
Government consumption 11.4 10.1 8.4 7.7 8.0 8.0 8.0 7.8 7.6 7.5
Gross fixed investment 14.5 14.8 16.3 17.3 13.7 13.8 14.3 14.9 15.5 16.0
Exports of goods & services 10.3 16.3 18.9 17.5 13.2 15.5 17.0 17.9 18.9 19.9
Imports of goods & services 19.9 28.5 29.4 25.8 20.8 23.8 26.7 26.9 27.6 27.4
Memorandum items
Oil production ('000 b/d) 691 680 699 686 660 c 655 660 682 689 700
National savings ratio (%) 7.4 11.2 13.6 14.4 10.0 9.1 9.8 10.7 12.3 14.5
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Real expenditure on GDP (E£ bn at constant 2016/17 prices)
GDP 3,378.8 3,470.0 3,654.4 3,857.5 3,995.2 4,127.5 c 4,308.1 4,534.4 4,790.8 5,039.5
Private consumption 2,910.5 3,057.9 3,087.9 3,117.3 3,345.2 3,453.1 3,629.1 3,821.4 4,040.2 4,228.0
Government consumption 341.7 350.2 356.0 366.0 390.5 399.5 411.5 422.6 436.9 454.4
Gross fixed investment 456.5 514.3 613.3 c 688.7 c 549.8 c 560.7 605.0 665.6 728.8 794.4
Exports of goods & services 302.7 548.9 722.1 706.1 553.1 606.8 681.9 753.4 828.6 905.6
Imports of goods & services 650.7 1,017.0 1,124.9 1,024.6 841.3 911.6 1,053.4 1,162.5 1,282.7 1,381.9
Stockbuilding 18.1 15.7 17.0 c 16.0 c 7.5 c 8.0 12.0 14.0 19.0 19.0
Domestic demand 3,726.8 3,938.1 4,074.2 c 4,188.0 c 4,293.0 c 4,421.4 4,657.6 4,923.5 5,224.9 5,495.8
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 4.3 2.7 5.3 5.6 3.6 3.3 c 4.4 5.3 5.7 5.2
Private consumption 4.5 5.1 1.0 1.0 7.3 3.2 5.1 5.3 5.7 4.6
Government consumption 3.9 2.5 1.7 2.8 6.7 2.3 3.0 2.7 3.4 4.0
Gross fixed investment 11.1 12.6 19.3 c 12.3 c -20.2 c 2.0 7.9 10.0 9.5 9.0
Exports of goods & services -14.8 81.3 31.6 -2.2 -21.7 9.7 12.4 10.5 10.0 9.3
Imports of goods & services -1.7 56.3 10.6 -8.9 -17.9 8.4 15.6 10.4 10.3 7.7
Domestic demand 5.1 5.7 3.5 c 2.8 c 2.5 c 3.0 5.3 5.7 6.1 5.2
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 3.8 4.4 0.9 0.8 5.9 2.7 4.3 4.5 4.8 3.9
Government consumption 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.6 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4
Gross fixed investment 1.4 1.7 2.9 c 2.1 c -3.6 c 0.3 1.1 1.4 1.4 1.4
External balance -1.3 -3.6 1.9 2.3 0.8 -0.4 -1.6 -0.9 -1.0 -0.5
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Origin of GDP (E£ bn at constant 2016/17 prices)
GDP at factor cost 3,292.0 3,409.5 3,598.9 3,783.8 a 3,879.4 a 4,007.9 4,183.2 4,403.0 4,652.0 4,893.5
Agriculture 386.0 398.5 411.0 424.7 a 438.7 a 449.7 463.2 476.2 491.4 511.0
Industry 1,342.0 1,370.5 1,452.8 1,535.6 1,566.3 1,625.8 1,697.4 1,782.2 1,874.9 1,959.3
Services 1,310.7 1,640.4 1,735.2 1,823.5 1,874.4 1,932.4 2,022.7 2,144.6 2,285.7 2,423.2
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 3.1 3.2 3.1 3.3 a 3.3 a 2.5 3.0 2.8 3.2 4.0
Industry 0.7 2.1 6.0 5.7 2.0 3.8 4.4 5.0 5.2 4.5
Services 3.3 25.2 5.8 5.1 2.8 3.1 4.7 6.0 6.6 6.0
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 11.9 11.7 11.5 11.4 a 12.1 a 12.0 11.9 11.6 11.3 11.2
Industry 32.9 34.3 35.8 36.7 33.5 33.6 34.0 34.1 33.9 33.7
Services 55.2 54.1 52.7 51.9 54.4 54.3 54.2 54.4 54.8 55.1
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 1.4 -0.1 4.5 5.1 3.3 0.9 1.2 2.1 2.7 2.2
Total factor productivity growth 2.3 0.4 2.4 3.2 2.8 1.5 2.6 3.3 3.6 2.9
Growth of capital stock 3.2 4.2 5.9 6.8 3.1 3.0 3.5 4.2 4.8 5.3
Growth of potential GDP 5.2 3.1 3.6 4.4 4.1 4.4 5.9 6.6 7.1 6.5
Growth of real GDP 4.3 c 2.7 c 5.3 c 5.6 c 3.6 c 3.3 a 4.4 5.3 5.7 5.2
Growth of real GDP per head 2.0 c -1.8 c 3.3 c 3.6 c 1.8 c 1.5 2.5 3.4 3.8 3.3
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 91.0 95.2 97.1 98.9 100.6 102.4 104.3 106.1 108.0 110.0
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 269.1 194.5 249.1 316.4 368.0 400.7 435.3 478.0 512.4 548.9
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 2,960 2,040 2,570 3,200 3,660 3,910 4,180 4,500 4,740 4,990
Private consumption (US$ bn) 223.6 168.9 212.8 261.4 315.7 346.4 379.2 411.8 437.3 459.4
Private consumption per head (US$) 2,460 1,770 2,190 2,640 3,140 3,380 3,640 3,880 4,050 4,180
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 1,057.1 1,062.3 1,145.6 1,230.9 1,290.2 c 1,362.3 1,453.1 1,567.7 1,691.2 1,812.8
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 11,620 11,160 11,800 12,450 12,830 c 13,300 13,940 14,770 15,650 16,480
Personal disposable income (E£ bn) 2,223 c 3,019 c 3,852 c 4,508 c 5,154 c 5,662 6,251 6,893 7,594 8,293
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 221 c 169 c 216 c 268 c 326 c 361 397 434 463 489
Growth of real disposable income (%) 4.8 c 6.6 c 2.4 c 1.9 c 8.0 c 4.1 5.8 5.8 6.3 5.1
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 1.23 1.27 1.28 1.30 1.31 1.32 1.33 1.36 1.38 1.41
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.36 0.24 0.29 0.37 0.44 0.43 0.44 0.47 0.47 0.48
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.92 0.88 0.90 0.92 0.99 c 0.97 0.97 0.99 1.01 1.03
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.13 0.13 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.18
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 32.7 32.2 30.1 28.3 27.2 28.3 29.1 28.7 28.6 27.9
Interest 8.3 8.2 9.4 9.5 9.3 8.7 8.5 8.9 8.9 8.7
Non-interest 24.4 24.0 20.8 18.8 17.8 19.7 20.6 19.9 19.7 19.3
Government revenue 20.3 21.8 20.6 20.3 19.3 20.2 21.7 22.8 23.2 22.6
Budget balance -12.5 -10.4 -9.5 -8.0 -7.9 -8.1 -7.4 -5.9 -5.4 -5.3
Primary balance -4.2 -2.2 -0.1 1.5 1.4 0.6 1.1 2.9 3.4 3.4
Total public debt 96.9 103.2 92.6 84.2 88.1 92.0 94.0 91.7 88.4 85.2
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate E£:US$ (av) 10.07 17.84 17.82 16.82 15.82 15.70 15.73 15.89 16.40 16.97
Exchange rate E£:US$ (year-end) 18.13 17.77 17.91 16.05 15.75 15.72 15.75 16.14 16.68 17.24
Exchange rate E£:€ (av) 11.14 20.15 21.05 18.83 18.05 18.75 18.40 18.23 19.27 20.62
Exchange rate E£:€ (year-end) 19.11 21.31 20.51 18.03 19.32 18.54 18.27 18.56 19.93 21.20
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 101.1 c 71.8 c 80.0 c 94.2 c 105.1 c 105.8 110.3 112.7 110.9 108.7
Purchasing power parity E£:US$ (av) 2.56 3.27 3.87 4.32 4.51 4.62 4.71 4.85 4.97 5.14
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 39.0 20.9 13.3 13.3 19.7 16.6 13.4 12.4 12.2 14.8
Domestic credit growth (%) 40.6 5.7 16.4 7.6 23.1 10.7 6.8 9.1 9.6 13.6
Commercial banks' lending rate (av; %) 13.6 18.2 18.3 16.1 11.4 9.5 10.4 10.7 10.7 10.6
Deposit rate (av; %) 11.5 17.0 17.1 14.9 9.7 7.5 8.0 9.0 9.0 9.3
3-month Treasury-bill rate (year-end; %) 14.2 19.3 18.9 16.8 13.1 13.4 13.5 13.8 13.8 14.0
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 28.7 29.3 28.9 28.3 28.5 a 29.3 30.2 31.0 31.9 32.7
Labour force (% change) 2.7 1.9 -1.4 -1.8 0.4 a 2.8 3.1 2.9 2.8 2.6
Unemployment rate (%) 12.6 11.8 9.9 7.9 8.0 a 8.3 8.3 8.1 8.0 7.8
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
Consumer prices (av) 13.8 29.5 14.4 9.2 5.1 a 5.5 5.9 5.0 5.1 5.2
Producer prices (av) 13.8 33.2 24.1 5.0 -7.0 a 16.1 8.7 4.8 3.9 1.7
GDP deflator (av) 6.3 24.7 21.4 13.6 5.6 4.6 4.3 5.4 4.7 5.4
Private consumption deflator (av) 7.0 27.4 24.6 14.9 5.8 5.5 4.4 4.2 3.7 3.9
Government consumption deflator (av) 3.7 10.4 4.1 7.0 6.6 5.5 5.9 5.0 5.1 5.7
Fixed investment deflator (av) 5.8 16.5 17.6 b 13.9 b 8.2 6.5 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0
Average nominal wages (av) 7.2 11.5 5.1 16.2 5.0 7.0 6.0 7.6 7.0 6.0
Average real wages (% change) -5.9 b -13.9 b -8.1 b 6.4 b -0.1 1.4 0.1 2.5 1.9 0.8
Unit labour costs (E£-based; av) 8.5 b 13.6 b 1.6 b 11.0 b -2.3 3.6 3.7 3.4 3.2 2.7
Unit labour costs (US$-based) -16.9 b -35.9 b 1.7 b 17.5 b 3.9 4.3 3.5 2.4 0.0 -0.8
Labour costs per hour (E£) 18.2 b 20.4 b 21.7 b 25.4 b 25.7 27.0 28.6 30.5 32.6 34.5
Labour costs per hour (US$) 1.8 b 1.1 b 1.2 b 1.5 b 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.0
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -20.5 -7.9 -7.7 -10.2 -14.2 -19.2 -20.6 -21.4 -17.7 -9.4
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -8.8 -3.6 -2.7 -3.0 -3.7 -4.6 -4.5 -4.3 -3.3 -1.6
Goods: exports fob 20.0 23.3 28.0 28.5 25.0 32.0 35.9 38.7 41.8 47.4
Goods: imports fob -58.3 -59.9 -65.8 -66.0 -62.0 -77.6 -84.9 -91.1 -92.4 -91.9
Trade balance -38.3 -36.5 -37.8 -37.5 -37.0 -45.6 -49.0 -52.4 -50.6 -44.4
Services: credit 13.6 19.5 23.6 25.1 15.1 17.1 19.9 22.1 23.8 25.1
Services: debit -10.0 -10.4 -10.5 -13.0 -10.5 -11.0 -12.3 -13.2 -13.9 -14.2
Services balance 3.6 9.2 13.1 12.1 4.6 6.0 7.6 8.9 9.9 11.0
Primary income: credit 0.4 0.7 0.9 1.0 0.5 1.1 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6
Primary income: debit -4.7 -6.1 -9.4 -12.6 -11.6 -11.7 -13.2 -13.8 -14.4 -15.4
Primary income balance -4.3 -5.3 -8.5 -11.6 -11.0 -10.6 -11.9 -12.5 -13.0 -13.8
Secondary income: credit 18.9 25.1 26.1 27.4 30.0 32.0 33.9 35.8 37.3 39.2
Secondary income: debit -0.4 -0.3 -0.6 -0.6 -0.9 -1.0 -1.1 -1.2 -1.3 -1.4
Secondary income balance 18.5 24.8 25.5 26.8 29.2 31.0 32.8 34.6 36.0 37.8
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 2.1 c 6.7 c 2.5 c -0.4 c -10.6 c 10.1 5.9 4.7 4.4 4.3
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment 8.1 7.4 8.1 9.0 5.9 7.0 8.6 9.9 11.2 12.4
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 3.0 3.8 3.3 2.8 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 20.8 25.7 20.1 16.4 11.6 12.7 13.7 13.9 14.1 14.2
Outward direct investment -0.21 -0.20 -0.32 -0.41 -0.33 -0.34 -0.37 -0.41 -0.46 -0.52
Net foreign direct investment 7.90 7.21 7.82 8.61 5.53 6.69 8.20 9.48 10.77 11.92
Stock of foreign direct investment 102.3 109.7 117.7 126.6 132.5 139.5 148.1 158.0 169.2 181.6
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 1124.4 1152.1 1212.4 1280.5 1317.0 1362.3 1420.4 1488.5 1566.1 1,652
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 38.0 56.4 47.3 40.0 36.0 34.8 34.0 33.0 33.0 33.1
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.30 0.34 1.66 0.69 0.46 0.50 0.58 0.64 0.70 0.74
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.36 0.37 0.37 0.37 0.40 0.38 0.38 0.39 0.40 0.41
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 69.2 84.7 100.2 115.1 135.2 150.6 157.9 160.5 161.2 162.0
Total external debt (% of GDP) 29.8 38.2 35.4 33.6 35.2 36.0 34.6 32.4 30.4 28.0
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 12.6 9.8 10.1 10.8 16.1 15.6 17.7 19.6 21.9 20.1
Debt/exports ratio (%) 131 124 128 141 194 185 176 166 156 144
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data are for historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is The Economist Intelligence Unit
Global data US and OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: Economist Intelligence Unit aggregate
US and OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: Brent
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
US$ effective exchange rate: IMF, IFS; nominal weighted index, 1990=100
Domestic data GDP growth: IMF, IFS; at constant 2016/17 prices: Ministry of Planning/Central Bank of Egypt, Annual Report; Monthly Bulletin
Oil production: EGPC
Cotton: CBE, Annual Report; Monthly Bulletin
Tourism: CBE, Annual Report; Monthly Bulletin; IDSC, Monthly Economic Bulletin
Suez Canal revenue: SCA, Annual Report; Monthly Report; IDSC, Monthly Economic Bulletin
General business indicators: IDSC, Monthly Economic Bulletin
Consumer prices: IMF, IFS; IDSC, Monthly Economic Bulletin
Exchange rates: IMF, IFS; IDSC, Monthly Economic Bulletin
Budget deficit: IDSC, Monthly Economic Bulletin
Population and growth: CAPMAS, Statistical Yearbook
Literacy rates: CAPMAS, Statistical Yearbook
Labour force: CAPMAS, Statistical Yearbook; UN, Human Development Report
GDP per head: US$ GDP divided by population
Balance of payments: IMF, IFS; CBE, Annual Report; Monthly Bulletin; IDSC, Monthly Economic Bulletin
Foreign direct investment: IMF, IFS; CBE
Debt: World Bank, International Debt Statistics
Government budget data and current and constant price national accounts data refer to fiscal years ending June 30th
Market opportunities industry data are subject to considerable revision owing to differences at source
Unemployment data are based on a series provided by the Ministry of Planning. Unemployment is, however, widely held to be significantly higher than these data indicate
Abbreviations CAPMAS: Central Agency for Public Mobilisation and Statistics
CBE: Central Bank of Egypt
EGPC: Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation
IDSC: Cabinet Information and Decision Support Centre
IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
SCA: Suez Canal Authority
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows The Economist Intelligence Unit to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by The Economist Intelligence Unit for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2016-20) and from Economist Intelligence Unit assessments for the forecast period (2021-25). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by The Economist Intelligence Unit for 2016-20. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2021-25 are based on Economist Intelligence Unit assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; The Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2016-20 ranges are then used to derive 2021-25 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2021-25, not to the likely situation in 2025 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2018 or 2023). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2016-20   2021-25  
  Egypt Regional average a Egypt Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 4 3.1 4 3.2
  2. Risk of social unrest 3 2.5 3 2.5
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 2 2.3 2 2.4
  4. Government and opposition 2 3.1 2 2.9
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 3 2.5 3 2.7
  6. International disputes or tensions 3 2.6 3 2.7
  7. Government policy towards business 3 3.1 4 3.4
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 2 2.5 3 2.7
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 3 2.2 3 2.4
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 2 1.9 2 2.2
 11. Efficiency of legal system 2 2.4 2 2.4
 12. Corruption 2 2.2 2 2.6
 13. Impact of crime 3 3.2 3 3.3
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 3 4.1 4 4.2
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 1 2.4 2 2.9
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 2 3.4 2 2.9
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 2 4.1 5 3.8
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 2 3.4 4 3.6
  6. Quality of policymaking 3 2.8 3 2.8
  7. Institutional underpinnings 3 2.9 3 3.0
  8. Asset prices 2 2.5 3 2.6
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 5 3.5 5 3.6
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 3 3.4 3 3.4
  3. Real GDP growth* 4 1.5 4 3.2
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 2 1.9 2 1.8
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 4 1.4 4 2.6
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 3 1.6 3 2.7
  7. The natural resource endowment* 2 3.9 2 3.9
  8. Profitability* 5 1.7 5 3.5
  9. Regional integration 3 2.9 3 2.9
 10. Proximity to markets 3 2.4 3 2.2
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 3 2.9 3 3.1
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 2 2.8 3 2.9
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 2 2.5 3 2.8
  4. Promotion of competition 2 2.2 3 2.6
  5. Protection of intellectual property 1 2.2 2 2.5
  6. Price controls 3 2.9 4 3.1
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 2 2.3 2 2.4
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 2 2.2 2 2.2
  9. Minority shareholders 3 2.8 3 3.0
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 3 2.8 4 3.3
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 3 3.1 3 3.2
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 3 3.4 3 3.4
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 3 2.9 4 3.1
  5. Government favouritism 2 2.7 2 2.8
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 3 3.3 3 3.5
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 3 3.1 3 3.2
  3. Ease of trading* 3 2.6 3 3.0
  4. Openness of trade* 2 3.1 2 2.9
  5. Restrictions on the current account 3 3.4 4 3.6
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 5 4.1 4 4.0
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 5 4.2 5 4.4
  3. Value-added tax* 4 4.2 3 3.9
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 2 3.7 3 3.8
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 3 2.5 3 3.2
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 3 2.6 3 2.7
  7. Tax complexity 2 3.2 3 3.4
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 3 3.0 3 2.8
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 2 3.1 3 3.2
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 3 3.3 4 3.4
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 2 2.5 3 2.8
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 3 2.6 3 2.9
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 2 2.6 3 2.7
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 4 4.4 4 4.4
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 2 2.6 3 2.9
  3. Quality of workforce* 2 2.6 2 2.8
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 2 3.0 2 3.2
  5. Health of the workforce* 3 3.2 3 3.4
  6. Level of technical skills 3 2.9 3 3.0
  7. Cost of living* 4 2.6 3 2.6
  8. Incidence of strikes* 3 3.2 4 3.4
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 3 2.8 3 2.6
 10. Extent of wage regulation 3 2.8 3 2.8
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 3 2.9 3 2.7
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 4 3.1 4 3.2
  2. Broadband connection speed* 1 1.6 3 3.3
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 3 2.6 3 3.0
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 2 2.6 3 2.8
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 2 2.1 2 2.1
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 4 3.2 4 3.3
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 3 3.1 3 3.3
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 2 2.9 4 3.1
  9. Rents of office space* 2 2.8 2 2.9
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 2 2.2 3 2.4
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 2 3.2 2 3.2
  3. Scope of e-government* 2 2.3 3 3.1
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 4 4.1 4 3.6
  5. Internet use* 2 3.0 3 3.3
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 1 2.4 2 2.8
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 3 2.2 3 2.5
  8. Research infrastructure* 3 2.4 3 2.7
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 17 countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE, Angola, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.

Subject: Macroeconomics; Politics; Productivity; International trade; Population growth; Economic reform; Demonstrations & protests; Economic growth; Tax reform; COVID-19; Natural gas; Tax rates; Foreign exchange rates; Pandemics; Consumption; Purchasing power parity; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Presidential elections; Coronaviruses; Special drawing rights; Economic forecasts; Private enterprise

Business indexing term: Subject: Macroeconomics Productivity International trade Economic reform Economic growth Tax reform Tax rates Foreign exchange rates Consumption Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Special drawing rights Economic forecasts Private enterprise; Industry: 92111 :‎ Executive Offices

Location: Egypt; Africa

People: el-Sisi, Abdel-Fattah

Company / organization: Name: Economist Intelligence Unit; NAICS: 516210; Name: Society of Muslim Brothers; NAICS: 813110

Classification: 92111: Executive Offices

Identifier / keyword: Egypt; Africa

Title: Country Forecast Egypt September 2021

Publication title: Country Forecast. Egypt; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09669507

e-ISSN: 20489307

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Statistics, Country Report

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611016627

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-egypt-september-2021/docview/2611016627/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Singapore September 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-singapore-september-2021/docview/2635776847/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Singapore&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Singapore+September+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-06&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Singapore&amp;rft.issn=02696711&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Singapore; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: Singapore; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Singapore September 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Singapore; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02696711

e-ISSN: 20475780

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2635776847

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-singapore-september-2021/docview/2635776847/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-03-05

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Nigeria September 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-nigeria-september-2021/docview/2634342255/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Nigeria&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Nigeria+September+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-02&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Nigeria&amp;rft.issn=02694204&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Nigeria; Africa

Identifier / keyword: Nigeria; Africa

Title: Country Report Nigeria September 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Nigeria; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02694204

e-ISSN: 20475462

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2634342255

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-nigeria-september-2021/docview/2634342255/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-03-01

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Austria September 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-austria-september-2021/docview/2611014241/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Economic outlook 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Real GDP growth (%) -6.4 3.8 4.2 2.0 1.4 1.3 Consumer price inflation (av; %; EU hamonised measure) 1.4 2.4 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0 Budget balance (% of GDP) -8.8 -7.9 -5.7 -4.7 -2.8 -2.8 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.5 2.8 2.9 3.2 3.8 4.0 3-month Treasury rate (av; %) -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3 Exchange rate €:US$ (av) 0.88 0.84 0.85 0.87 0.85 0.82 The coronavirus crisis disrupted many of the economy's most dynamic sectors, such as services. [...]Austria's economy shrank more than other EU countries in 2020. Demographic outlook Population (m) 2015 2020 2025 Total 8.6 8.7 8.8 Male 4.2 4.3 4.3 Female 4.4 4.4 4.4 Period averages (%) 2016-20 2021-25 Population growth 0.3 0.2 Working-age population growth 0.0 -0.3 Labour force growth 1.2 -0.4 Net migration should support consistent population growth, by an annual average of 0.2% over the forecast period. Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 8.7 Population growth 0.3 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 429.7b Real GDP growth 0.4 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 492.6b Real domestic demand growth 0.3 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 49,576 Inflation 1.6 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 56,828 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.1 Exchange rate (av) €:US$ 0.88b FDI inflows (% of GDP) -3.7 a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Actual.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Austria&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Austria+September+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-02&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Austria&amp;rft.issn=09668950&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - The coalition government comprises the centre-right Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) and the environmentalist Greens. The government has accelerated its deadline for net carbon neutrality, to 2040, but retains the hardline migration policy and tax-cutting agenda of its ÖVP-Freedom Party (FPÖ) predecessor. Although the chasms between the two parties on these issues (tax cuts, climate change and migration) were clear from the outset, the outbreak of the coronavirus only two months into the coalition focused attention elsewhere. They will return to the forefront of the political agenda this year, and we expect the two parties to reach agreement on key policy decisions in the autumn. We expect that the coalition will complete its term, to 2024.

Austria--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.72 7.74 16 20 10 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

- Austria's score in The Economist Intelligence Unit's business environment model increases slightly from 7.72 in the historical period (2016-20) to 7.74 in the forecast period (2021-25). The worsening in the rankings is driven by the coronavirus crisis, as Austria's large tourism and hospitality sectors make its economy more vulnerable than peer economies to the restrictions. Nonetheless, high-quality infrastructure, robust financing conditions, high levels of research and development (R&D) spending, and a well-functioning labour market keep Austria's business environment accommodative compared with eastern Europe.

Austria--highlights: Economic outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Real GDP growth (%) -6.4 3.8 4.2 2.0 1.4 1.3
Consumer price inflation (av; %; EU hamonised measure) 1.4 2.4 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0
Budget balance (% of GDP) -8.8 -7.9 -5.7 -4.7 -2.8 -2.8
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.5 2.8 2.9 3.2 3.8 4.0
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3
Exchange rate €:US$ (av) 0.88 0.84 0.85 0.87 0.85 0.82

- The coronavirus crisis disrupted many of the economy's most dynamic sectors, such as services. As a result, Austria's economy shrank more than other EU countries in 2020. Real GDP contracted by 6.4%. Despite the severe contraction in the services sector's output in 2020, we expect activity to rebound more rapidly than in other tourism-dependent economies, as the sector's strong connections with the robust German economy are accelerating the recovery. Weakness in the trading and travel environment will continue to weigh on the current account, and reduced services exports will contribute to a slow rebound in the surplus, which will reach 4% of GDP by 2025.

Austria--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2015 2020 2025
Total 8.6 8.7 8.8
 Male 4.2 4.3 4.3
 Female 4.4 4.4 4.4
Period averages (%)   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth   0.3 0.2
Working-age population growth   0.0 -0.3
Labour force growth   1.2 -0.4

- Net migration should support consistent population growth, by an annual average of 0.2% over the forecast period. Austria has an ageing population, common to other advanced economies, which will cause a steady decline in the working-age population over the next five years. Immigration from eastern Europe will remain strong, despite the coronavirus shock in 2020. The influx of migrants and refugees from Syria, Afghanistan and Iraq, which pushed up the population figure in 2015, is not expected to be repeated. The participation of older workers is increasing, but remains below the EU average.

Austria--highlights: Market opportunities   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 429.7 486.3 500.2 511.2 537.5 573.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 49,576 55,974 57,434 58,568 61,445 65,432
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 249.0 264.7 270.1 274.8 290.0 308.7
Household consumption (US$ bn) 215.4 242.8 253.2 259.0 273.3 290.9
Household consumption per head (US$) 24,850 27,950 29,080 29,680 31,240 33,180

- Austria is a wealthy country by international standards, with GDP per head well above the regional average. Household consumption growth has been subdued in recent years, despite a solid labour market, as high savings rates have weighed on the economy's response to solid real income growth. The outlook for household incomes and consumption remains subdued throughout the forecast period as lacklustre economic conditions drag on consumer confidence. An ageing demographic profile and a rise in the number of single-person households will continue to drive demand for housing, healthcare and leisure services. Income inequality will remain lower than the regional average.

Austria--highlights: Long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 1.8 1.6 1.7
Growth of real GDP 2.0 1.5 1.7
Labour productivity growth 1.0 1.5 1.3

- Real GDP per head is forecast to grow by an annual average of 1.7% in 2021-50. An ageing demographic profile will act as a drag on long-term growth prospects, although Austria has more scope than some other EU countries to raise levels of participation in the labour force, particularly among older workers and women. There is also potential for an improvement in productivity growth, with the government encouraging greater R&D activity and investment in education. Austria's large trade and investment exposure to central and eastern Europe will be a net positive for growth in the long term.

Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 8.7 Population growth 0.3
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 429.7 b Real GDP growth 0.4
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 492.6 b Real domestic demand growth 0.3
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 49,576 Inflation 1.6
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 56,828 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.1
Exchange rate (av) €:US$ 0.88 b FDI inflows (% of GDP) -3.7
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Actual.
Background: Austria became an important force in central Europe with the formation of the Habsburg empire in the 15th century, and remained so until the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian empire at the end of the first world war. The Republic of Austria emerged in 1918. In 1938 Austria was incorporated into the German Third Reich. With the departure of the victorious Allied forces in 1955, it regained independence as a neutral country. In the post-war period, Austria took great strides to catch up economically with the rest of the developed world and is now one of the most advanced nations.
Political structure: Austria is a federal republic, and the head of state is the federal president. The government is led by the federal chancellor. The national parliament has two houses: the Federal Council (Bundesrat, the upper house), of 62 members appointed by state parliaments, and the National Council (Nationalrat, the lower house), which has 183 members elected by proportional representation. An early general election was held on September 29th 2019, resulting in an Austrian People's Party (ÖVP)-Greens coalition, which was sworn in on January 7th 2020.
Policy issues: The government's primary focus is on mitigating the economic fallout from the coronavirus outbreak, while coordinating the vaccine rollout. Medium-term priorities include implementing the rollout of fifth-generation (5G) technology; increasing digitalisation; and transitioning the energy sector away from coal and nuclear power. Investment spending will increase in our forecast period (2021-25) compared with recent years.
Taxation: Austrian labour tax as a percentage of GDP is among the highest in the EU. A 2016 tax reform lowered the tax burden for low- and middle-income earners, but raised the top personal income-tax rate from 50% to 55%. The lowest rate of income tax was cut from 25% to 20% in 2020. Social security contributions, shared between employers and employees, are high. Corporation tax is levied at a rate of 25%. Dividend and investment income is subject to a withholding tax of 27.5%. Value-added tax (VAT) is levied at a rate of 20%; a reduced rate of 13% (raised from 10% in 2016) applies for certain goods.
Foreign trade: Trade relations are dominated by Germany, which accounts for over one-third of total imports and exports. The current-account surplus tends to be driven by strong tourism exports, boosting the services surplus.
Principal exports 2020 % of total Principal imports 2020 % of total
Machinery & transport equipment 38.9 Machinery & transport equipment 36.1
Chemicals & related products 15.2 Chemicals & related products 14.1
Food, drinks & tobacco 8.3 Food, drinks & tobacco 7.8
Raw materials 3.1 Mineral fuels, lubricants & related materials 5.5
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
Germany 29.9 Germany 41.1
US 6.1 Italy 6.1
Italy 6.1 Switzerland 5.5
Switzerland 5.4 Netherlands 4.5
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance Austria is a parliamentary republic with a federalised system of government. The constitution, reformed in the immediate post-war period, provides for an upper and a lower house of parliament to draft legislation, and divides power between the central government, based in Vienna, and the nine states. The lower house of parliament (the National Council) takes the leading role in designing legislation, with representatives directly elected to five-year terms and the chancellor typically appointed from the largest political grouping in the chamber. The upper house (the Federal Council) takes a diminished advisory role, owing to their indirect appointment based on the elections for the federal states. The president, currently Alexander van der Bellen, is directly elected, serves a term lasting six years until 2023. Although theoretically entrusted with great power within the Austrian constitution, in practice presidents serve a largely ceremonial role. Historically, Austria has been governed by "grand coalitions" of the established centre-left and centre-right, but the emergence of new parties have made these coalitions less frequent in more recent history. The government currently consists of the centre-right Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) and the environmentalist Greens, who collectively hold 97 seats in the 183 seat National Council.
General election results
  % of vote   No. of seats  
  2017 2019 2017 2019
Social Democratic Party (SPö) 26.9 21.2 52 40
Austrian People's Party (öVP) 31.5 37.5 62 71
Freedom Party (FPö) 26.0 16.2 51 31
Greens 3.8 13.9 - 26
NEOS 5.3 8.1 10 15
List Pilz 4.4 - 8 -
Total incl others 100.0 100.0 183 183
Political outlook: Political stability In January 2020 the first national coalition between a centre-right party and an environmentalist party in European history took office. This led to the reappointment of Sebastian Kurz, the leader of the conservative Austrian People's Party (ÖVP), as chancellor. The election gave the ÖVP (which won 37.5% of the vote) 71 seats in parliament, which, together with the Greens' 26 seats, resulted in a five-seat majority-fairly small by Austrian standards. Risk factors for government effectiveness include the greater influence of the ÖVP on policy (historically, Austrian coalitions have been more balanced) and the inexperience of the Greens' government ministers. As a result, the Greens have had to give up on some of their priorities; for example, they supported the refusal by the ÖVP to take in asylum-seekers from Greece and the approval of legislation that allows the monitoring of Muslim organisations.
In May 2021 Mr Kurz announced that he was under investigation by state prosecutors over claims that he gave false evidence to a parliamentary committee on alleged corruption under the former coalition government between the ÖVP and the far-right Freedom Party (FPÖ), which was in office in 2017-19. The Greens are now under pressure from the opposition to take a harder stance against the ÖVP. However, at a Green party conference in mid-June, Werner Kogler, the party leader, made a strong defence of the partnership, saying that it was better than the ÖVP's previous coalition with the far-right FPÖ.
The broad support among the Green party delegates for continuing the coalition is consistent with The Economist Intelligence Unit's forecast that the government will last its full term, to 2024. Moreover, in June Herbert Kickl was chosen as the next leader of the FPÖ, who we expect will position the party further to the right, with extreme positions such as opposing vaccine passports. Mr Kickl's election will be positive for the stability of the coalition, because Norbert Hofer, the previous leader, was keen to move closer to the ÖVP, but Mr Kickl does not share this view, leaving the ÖVP without an alternative partner to the Greens.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness The constitution provides for a well-established division of power between the legislative, executive and judicial branches of government, all of which function well by international standards. Relations between the government and its social partners (defined as trade unions and business groups) have become increasingly fractious in recent years. Historically, government decisions are rooted in the social partnership system (Sozialpartnerschaft), which establishes a co-operative relationship with trade unions and employers on economic policymaking. Membership of the Sozialpartnerschaft is compulsory and its role has been made explicit in law. The social partners are encouraged by government to participate in drafting proposals relating to specific issues. As a consequence, they have been involved in negotiations on issues such as public healthcare reform, opening Austria's labour market to workers from new EU member states and improving education. However, this framework has tended to work to the advantage of the established parties: the ÖVP and the Social Democratic Party (SPÖ). As non-established parties, such as the FPÖ and the Greens, take on a larger role in national politics, reliance on this framework has started to weaken. New parties' presence in national politics will probably increase their influence in many of the social partners' groups, where minor parties tend to be significantly underrepresented compared with the ÖVP and the SPÖ. In the previous ÖVP-FPÖ coalition, the government bypassed the social partners when it relaxed rules on working hours in 2018. We expect similar behaviour in the new ÖVP-Green administration, particularly on environmental policy implementation due to be approved in 2021.
Despite the existence of federal states, government is highly centralised Austria's nine federal states (Länder) each have an elected legislature, a state government and a governor, but have fewer direct powers than states in some other federal countries, including Germany. A high proportion of tax revenue is collected at the federal level, despite some pressure to increase fiscal federalism. Although spending is more decentralised, decision-making is largely concen-trated at the federal level, with subnational governments mainly tasked with the administration and implementation of programmes. The principle of Finanzausgleich (fiscal equalisation) regulates the distribution of revenue at the federal level between the states. Co-ordination between the different layers of government is strong, but also complex, and the lack of accountability and transparency contributes to inefficiencies in the fiscal framework and a high level of bureaucracy. This has impeded weaken institutional effectiveness but is not substantial in a global context.
Political outlook: Election watch The next general election is scheduled for 2024. The coalition between the ÖVP and the Greens has 97 seats in the National Council (Nationalrat, the lower house of parliament). Although this gives it only a narrow majority, we do not expect an early election; the coalition is likely to serve a full five-year term to September 2024. The next scheduled election, to be held in 2022, is for the largely ceremonial post of federal president.
The ÖVP's firm representation in government and the dent in public support compared with the 2019 election that both the ÖVP and the Greens have suffered as a result of the pandemic will incentivise them to remain in the coalition. According to Politico, a newspaper, as at August 25th the ÖVP was polling on average at 34% and the Greens at 11%, compared with 40% and 17% respectively on March 2nd 2020, before the coronavirus crisis. In contrast, support for both the centre-left SPÖ and the FPÖ rose by 5 percentage points over the same period.
Political outlook: International relations We expect Mr Kurz's stance towards Europe to harden in the coming months, which could lead to tensions in future EU meetings on further co-ordinated crisis efforts. For example, Mr Kurz has ruled out taking in Afghan refugees.
The EU's transatlantic relations have improved since the inauguration of Joe Biden as US president, and we expect significant co-operation on several fronts, including climate change, in the run-up to the UN Climate Change Conference (COP26) in November. Both sides have made moves to defuse trade tensions. The EU and the US have reached a five-year truce in the 17-year dispute over subsidies to a US aerospace firm, Boeing, and its European rival, Airbus. Both sides have also agreed to seek to resolve a dispute over the steel and aluminium sectors. The EU has temporarily suspended an increase in retaliatory tariffs on a range of US goods that had been scheduled to start in June; meanwhile the US has temporarily suspended tariffs on digital services. However, some US-EU tensions will endure, including on trade, on which it will be difficult to reach a comprehensive agreement. EU efforts to level the playing field with China on trade and investment access will be slow to progress; the Comprehensive Agreement on Investment will not be passed by the European Parliament in 2021, and its prospects for ratification appear slim even in 2022.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
Overall position 7.72 7.74 16 20 10 11
Political environment 8.6 8.1 11 15 8 9
 Political stability 9.3 8.1 5 15 4 10
 Political effectiveness 8.1 8.1 14 14 8 9
Macroeconomic environment 8.0 7.5 12 24 7 9
Market opportunities 5.3 6.6 35 27 12 10
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 7.8 7.8 20 19 12 12
Policy towards foreign investment 8.2 7.3 20 26 12 12
Foreign trade & exchange controls 9.6 9.1 10 11 6 5
Taxes 6.5 7.1 33 28 9 7
Financing 6.6 7.8 33 20 14 9
The labour market 7.0 7.0 14 16 6 6
Infrastructure 8.3 8.0 11 16 8 10
Technological readiness 9.2 8.9 4 15 2 8
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Austria's score in The Economist Intelligence Unit's business environment model increases slightly from 7.72 in the historical period (2016-20) to 7.74 in the forecast period (2021-25). However, Austria drops four places to 20th in our global ranking and by one place to 11th among its 17 regional peers, just behind France and the UK. Like many countries, Austria has experienced significant disruption as a result of the coronavirus pandemic and the consequent economic fallout, and this has had implications for most areas of the business environment. On the positive side, the country's robust institutional framework, excellent infrastructure, relatively pro-business policy orientation, openness to international trade and strategic location at the heart of the EU will underpin Austria's status as a reasonably attractive location for business operations.
The coronavirus crisis has continued to worsen the business environment The banking sector will continue to be tested by the crisis, but the financing environment has become more resilient over recent years in response to macroprudential reforms and the gradual expansion of non-bank funding channels. Global trade has staged a rapid bounce-back from its collapse in the early months of the pandemic, but it remains likely that the fallout from the pandemic will exacerbate existing tensions between the world's major economic powers in the medium term. Increased protectionism is likely, slightly dampening the category score for foreign trade and exchange controls. Related to this, policy towards foreign investment will remain broadly favourable, but mirroring global trends there will be significantly tighter screening of inward investment on national security grounds. We expect a modest improvement in the taxes category, amid ongoing efforts to reduce the elevated labour tax burden, although progress will be dependent on economic conditions and the fiscal position.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Austria's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2021-22: Increased levels of state intervention in the economy, in response to the pandemic. Restrictive barriers in services sector persist.
2023-25: Modest strengthening of competition authority's powers. Administrative burden for companies remains comparatively high.
Policy towards foreign investment 2021-22: New capital inflows constrained by weak global economy and tightening of domestic screening rules on non-EU investment activity in strategic sectors.
2023-25: New incentives likely to aid economic recovery, including support for research and development investment.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2021-22: Easing pressure on export sector from coronavirus-related supply- and demand-side global shocks as the global economy recovers. Decline in UK-EU crossborder flows owing to increased UK-EU trade barriers.
2023-25: EU keeps focus on bilateral trade deals. Revival of US-EU trade relations on the backdrop of ongoing US-China tensions.
Taxes 2021-22: Tax rate in lowest income tax bracket cut from 25% to 20%. Temporary value-added tax (VAT) cut in food, services and tourism sectors. Investment tax relief for corporates.
2023-25: Possible reductions in personal and corporate income tax rates and realignment of environmental taxes, with aim of lowering tax burden towards 40%, contingent on fiscal position. Labour tax remains high from a regional perspective.
Financing 2021-22: Expanded central bank liquidity and state-backed loan schemes to support financial markets. Deterioration in banks' balance sheets amid pandemic fallout and persistent low-interest-rate environment.
2023-25: Growth in non-bank financing channels from a low base. Weak profitability hampers banks' efforts to strengthen capital bases.
The labour market 2021-22: Sharp labour market shock from the coronavirus crisis. Likely introduction of new job-creation measures.
2023-25: Gradual recovery in underlying labour market conditions. Policy focus on measures to raise participation of older workers and boost full-time female employment through changes to childcare provision and parental leave rules.
Infrastructure 2021-22: Gradual improvement of transport links with eastern Europe. Large rail infrastructure spending starts to take effect.
2023-25: Work continues on rail tunnel projects, including Brenner Base Tunnel link to Italy and Lobau Tunnel near the capital, Vienna, and upgrades of the domestic rail network.
Technological readiness 2021-22: Focus on expanding ultrafast broadband services. Internet use remains slightly below several regional peers, but research and development remains relatively strong.
2023-25: Focus on improving digital intensity among small and medium-sized firms, which lags most regional peers, further development of e-government services.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.0 7.5 12 24 7 9
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Underlying macroeconomic conditions strengthened throughout most of the historical period-particularly in 2016-19-supported by employment gains, improved household purchasing power, low inflation, increased investment, low borrowing costs and a period of firmer export activity. Activity then softened in 2019 amid a maturing global economic cycle and heightened world trade tensions, and declined sharply in the first half of 2020 as a result of the pandemic and temporary lockdown measures. Austria suffered a sharp decline in real GDP in 2020, reflecting both the strong pandemic-hit to the important tourism sector and the halt of global trade, which is very important for Austria's export-oriented economy.
Long-term effects will be mitigated by solid macroeconomic fundamentals Austria has reasonably solid macroeconomic fundamentals that include a comparatively high employment rate, fairly healthy public finances (in a regional context), low inflation, a moderate current-account surplus, a competitive export sector and high average income levels, backed by a strong institutional framework. These factors will mitigate in part the risk of longer-term "scarring effects" from the pandemic. Although a robust recovery is now under way, the economy now faces a period of higher unemployment, weakened public- and private-sector balance sheets, damaged supply chains and greater caution among firms and potential tourists. This could expose weaker structural supply-side issues, such as capacity constraints in the labour market, subdued productivity trends and comparatively sluggish take-up of digital technologies among small and medium enterprises (SMEs). A probable intensification of world trade tensions and further protectionist measures, alongside a period of weakened global demand, also do not augur well for Austria's small open economy, which could be adversely affected via trade and financial channels.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.8 7.8 20 19 12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The environment for private enterprise and competition is reasonably favourable, backed by a strong institutional framework and a stable legal code that offers solid protection of private and intellectual property and minority shareholder rights. Product markets are fairly well integrated into the global economy, following earlier liberalisation measures, and Austria performs well on a regional basis in terms of innovative start-ups. However, there are a number of factors that will continue to limit scope for improvement in the category score, including more restrictive regulations in the services sector and a higher level of direct state ownership than in many peer economies, a comparatively high administrative burden for companies, and areas of weakness in the public procurement and competition frameworks. The country performs well in terms of the ease of crossborder trading, obtaining utilities, enforcing contracts and resolving insolvency. However, payment of taxes and accessing finance can at times be a challenge, and the number of procedures and time taken to establish a new business are suboptimal, with Austria ranking poorly (at a global level) on this metric. According to the OECD's Services Trade Restrictiveness Index, Austria has a more restrictive policy than the OECD average in nine of 21 sectors covered, based on national policies relating to foreign labour and investment, barriers to competition, and regulatory transparency. Accountancy, engineering, computing services and retail are among the most regulated sectors.
State ownership of strategic assets will continue to increase
- The level of state influence in the economy is relatively high (in a regional context) and has recently increased as a result of emergency policy measures implemented in 2020 in response to the pandemic. Most are designed to be temporary, such as liquidity support for firms and wage subsidies for households. However, significant take-up by firms of state-backed loan guarantee schemes and targeted support for badly-hit sectors such as aviation and tourism potentially imply a longer-term affiliation that raises questions over how this increased level of state involvement will evolve.
- A reform in 2019 of the public holding company responsible for managing the Austrian state's major asset holdings-rebranded as Österreichische Beteiligungs AG (ÖBAG)-extended the government's influence and oversight powers of the companies involved, the size of their respective shareholdings, and also gave 'ÖBAG the power to purchase minority stakes in strategically relevant companies. Its portfolio comprises 11 enterprises, including full ownership of a federal real estate group (BIG) and mining company (GKB) and partial stakes in the Austrian post office, Austrian Casinos, Telekom Austria, OMV (a major oil producer) and Verbund (Austria's largest electricity provider). In early 2021 Thomas Schmid, the chief financial officer of ÖBAG, stepped down following leaked messages showing how he orchestrated his appointment to the position using his connections in the Austrian People's Party ÖVP and influencing the selection process. As a result, the chancellor, Sebastian Kurz, could potentially face charges from the anti-corruption prosecution related to his party's role in the incident.
- Austrian Federal Railways (ÖBB) is a separate wholly state-owned company, while local governments own the majority of the country's utilities and hospitals, as well as Vienna International Airport. There has been limited divestment activity over the past decade, with public opinion generally sceptical towards privatisation. This is unlikely to change, even against the backdrop of the political scandal.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.2 7.3 20 26 12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The policy of successive governments has generally been favourably disposed towards inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) and on the whole this will remain the case over the forecast period, reflecting the country's openness to international trade and its strategic location in Europe. Austria's score is underpinned by strong investor protection and very low expropriation risk. However, the country scores only adequately on the "openness of national culture" metric, amid a clear rightward shift on immigration-related issues over recent years. The government has also responded to hardening sentiment at regional level towards non-EU FDI in "strategic" sectors by tightening its foreign investment screening framework in 2020. Overall, we expect Austria to adopt a more interventionist stance on FDI activity and potential foreign takeovers in the forecast period, leading to declines in the country's score and global ranking in this category.

- At present, there are few specific legal or market access restrictions or limitations on foreign investment, although access to many services trades is subject to meeting certain regulations and there are relatively strict environmental impact assessment rules that may act as a constraint in the energy, agricultural and biotechnology industries, alongside variations in state-level regulations. In theory, the new screening regime will apply only to investment in "highly sensitive" or strategic sectors, although a previously limited scope of activities has been significantly expanded, implying that a broad range of investments will now require official approval.

FDI rules will continue to be tightened, dampening foreign investment
- The new investment screening framework (or Investment Control Act) took effect in July 2020, replacing and significantly broadening the scope of the rarely utilised Foreign Trade Act. Under the new framework, approval is required for any planned non-EU investments that entail the acquisition of more than a 10% stake in an Austrian enterprise in certain highly sensitive sectors (such as critical energy and digital infrastructure) or more than 25% or 50% stakes in other "sensitive sectors relevant for public order and/or national security". This tightening of rules on FDI comes amid the implementation (from October 2020) of a new EU-wide screening framework, driven in large part by increased concerns over the involvement of state-backed foreign actors (such as Chinese firms and Middle East sovereign wealth funds) in strategic infrastructure assets and the transfer of technological knowledge and intellectual property. Other countries including the US, UK, Canada and Australia are also in the process of tightening rules on foreign acquisitions.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
9.6 9.1 10 11 6 5
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The slight decline in the category score reflects the relative exposure of Austria's open economy to less favourable global trading conditions and increased protectionism, with the fallout from the pandemic likely to exacerbate tensions between the world's major economies and trading blocs. The foreign trade regime will continue to be shaped by the country's membership of the EU.

- Freedom of movement of goods, services, capital and persons exists within the bloc. No tariffs or quotas are permitted within the EU, and we do not expect any exchange controls.
- Amid a weakened multilateral trade system and opposition in many countries (notably the US, under the former president, Donald Trump) to further trade liberalisation, the EU's focus has been on bilateral trade deals. We expect the administration of Joe Biden in the US to take a multilateral approach, new opportunities could open up for the EU, including a possibility of reviving negotiations on a transatlantic free trade agreement. We expect the bloc to make gradual progress, but it will be inhibited by a more volatile global trading environment over the forecast period. Although global trade has staged an impressive recovery from the initial pandemic shock, it remains vulnerable to supply bottlenecks and uneven vaccination rates around the world. Moreover, many existing geopolitical trends, such as the rise in nationalist anti-globalist policies and the shifting economic balance of power from West to East will persist. This raises the prospect of deepening US-China tensions and a more challenging backdrop in which to manage the EU's trading relations with China, the US and the UK (amid ongoing disruption and antagonism related to Brexit), which could pose difficulties for Austria's externally oriented economy.

Austria's agricultural sector is broadly hostile to further trade liberalisation
- In recent years the EU has signed free-trade agreements with Canada, Singapore, Vietnam and Japan, upgraded its deal with Mexico and launched trade negotiations with Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand. A provisional association agreement was reached in 2019 between the EU and Mercosur (the South American trading bloc) to create the world's largest free-trade market of almost 800m people, following 20 years of talks. However, amid concerns in some member states, including Austria, over aspects of the current deal (mostly related to agriculture and climate), it is doubtful whether it will be finalised and gradually implemented from 2021, as intended.
- The UK and the EU managed to strike a trade deal in December 2020. The new agreement ensures the UK's access to the EU's single market without tariffs and quotas. Although the worst no-deal scenario was avoided, the new status quo makes trade slower and more costly thus putting a further dampener on the near-term trade outlook in Europe. Austrian exporters are not as directly exposed to the UK as some of their regional peers, but sectors with the strongest links such as automotive, machinery, chemicals and financial services are likely to face additional disruption from the new trading arrangements

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.5 7.1 33 28 9 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Austria's score for its tax regime rises slightly in the forecast period, owing to the lagged impact of earlier reforms and the expectation of further modest adjustments in the coming years. This drives a modest improvement in the global ranking and at the regional level. The total tax/GDP ratio (which includes social security contributions) has remained fairly stable over recent years, edging higher in 2019 to 43.1% (latest available Eurostat data), the fifth highest in the bloc and well above the EU average of 41.1%. In terms of tax structure, the share of receipts from value-added tax (VAT) and personal income is on a par with the EU average, whereas the proportion from employees' social security contributions is higher, and shares from corporate income, wealth-related taxes, environmental duties and property taxes are lower. The headline corporate tax rate has been unchanged since 2005, at 25%-similar to Belgium and Spain and above the EU average. The headline VAT rate of 20% is close to the EU average, with reduced rates of 13% and 10% applying on some items. A temporary 5% rate is applicable in sectors most affected by the pandemic at least until the end of 2021. There are six personal income tax rates, ranging from 20% (reduced from 25% in 2020) to 55%, with the top rate levied on taxable income above EUR1m. The main drawbacks of Austria's tax system are its relative complexity and a high labour tax burden, especially for low- and medium-income earners, which can reduce incentives to work. The tax wedge for a single earner receiving an average wage remains among the highest in the EU, which mainly reflects the relatively high level of social security contributions. This indicates that earlier phased tax reform packages implemented in 2010 and 2015 aimed at reducing the labour tax burden had only a limited impact.
Tax reductions are a central part of the new government's policy platform.
- The government has implemented a number of tax policy measures in response to the pandemic. These include a reduction in the lower rate of income tax from 25% to 20% for salaries between EUR11,000 and EUR18,000 (at least until the end of 2021); an extension of the top 55% income tax rate to 2025 (it was due to be abolished at end-2020); tax relief for companies in the form of a loss carryback facility and a tax deduction for investment; a one-off top-up of unemployment benefit; a temporary VAT rate cut to 5% in the tourism, foodservice and cultural sectors until end-2021; and the deferral of selected tax payments for individuals and businesses.
- Prior to the pandemic, the ÖVP-Green government had outlined a programme of tax reforms with the medium-term aim of lowering the tax/GDP ratio to about 40%. Most of the proposals matched the previous ÖVP-Freedom Party (FPÖ) government's envisaged plans, such as lower income tax rates for certain thresholds (specifically from 25% to 20%, 35% to 30% and 42% to 40%), lower health insurance contributions, a phased cut in the corporate tax rate to 21% and a rise in the corporate standard deduction from EUR30,000 to EUR100,000. The presence of the Greens also meant a proposed realignment of environ-mental taxes, with a restructuring of current levies such as vehicle-registration tax, company car tax, airline tax and road tolls, as well as the possible introduction of a carbon pricing scheme. Aside from the already implemented tax cut for low-income earners from 25% to 20%, these reforms have been put on hold until a clearer picture emerges of the economic impact of the pandemic. During the forecast period, we expect reforms aimed at lowering the labour tax burden, reshaping energy taxes and reducing the corporate tax rate. A new digital services tax on advertising services was introduced from 2020.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.6 7.8 33 20 14 9
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
A rise in unemployment could place strains on the banking sector Financing conditions have gradually improved in recent years amid fairly benign macroeconomic conditions, the highly accommodative monetary policy stance of the European Central bank (ECB) and steady growth of alternative funding channels in capital and money markets (from a modest base). The lagged impact of tighter regulation, macroprudential reforms and bank restructuring in the decade since the global financial crisis has also contributed to the emergence of a more resilient banking sector, with bolstered capital and liquidity positions and strengthened overall asset quality. Major banks' average common equity Tier 1 ratio was 16.1% at the end of 2020, slightly above the euro zone average and comfortably above minimum capital requirements under Basel III, while the share of non-performing loans for households and corporates was low (at around 2% at the end of 2020). Austrian banks retain significant ties with countries in central, east and south-east Europe (CESEE)-particularly the Czech Republic, Russia, Slovakia and Romania-albeit less so than a decade ago, especially in terms of exposure to foreign-currency loans. The underlying asset quality of banking sectors in CESEE has strengthened steadily over recent years amid improved macroeconomic developments, also reducing exposure risk of the main Austrian banks, although the damaging fallout from the pandemic implies a more uncertain near-term outlook. More broadly, banking sector profitability will remain under pressure as a result of persistently low interest rates, comparatively high operating costs and rising digitalisation-related expenditure. The state guarantees cover 90% of new credit lines to SMEs, as well as large enterprises and non-profit associations of up to a maximum of EUR25m. This reduces the direct exposure of financial institutions, although significant take-up by companies would raise the prospect of a lagged rise in loan defaults if demand in the economy remains subdued, generating losses that would partly weigh on lenders' capital positions and profitability. There is also the risk that a sustained rise in unemployment could trigger an increase in mortgage and consumer credit defaults.

- The bulk of financing in Austria, notably for SMEs, has traditionally been through bank loans and this is still largely the case. Capital and money markets are still relatively underdeveloped in a regional context, constrained in part by the small size of the domestic market, which carries a risk of volatility and high transaction costs for debt/equity financing. Market capitalisation and trading volumes of the main Vienna Stock Exchange are modest, with only muted interest in a recently launched segment aimed at new SME listings.
- Venture-capital investment has risen steadily from a low base in the past few years, primarily driven by start-up funding in the capital, Vienna. We expect a further gradual expansion of private-sector venture capital over the forecast period, supported in part by state-led incentives from the ÖVP-Green government.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.0 7.0 14 16 6 6
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Austria scores fairly well in this category, as reflected in its global and regional rankings. Although the labour market has been badly affected by the pandemic, policy has focused on job retention, with Austria's Kurzarbeit system allowing for reduced hours while workers remain employed and receive close to full compensation. The labour force is well qualified, and labour productivity is high-on a par with Germany's. The overall labour market is reasonably flexible compared with many other developed economies, with few restrictions on hiring and firing. Amid favourable economic conditions, this supported a robust expansion in employment and a steady decline in joblessness in 2016-19. Prior to the pandemic, the employment rate (among those aged 20-64) was a record-high 76.8%, well above an EU average of 73%, with the unemployment rate at an eight-year low of 4.2%. Participation of women and older workers followed a rising trend over recent years, although the female employment rate is buoyed by an unusually high proportion of part-time workers (one of the highest shares in the EU) and participation of older workers remains below the regional average. The gap between the employment (and inactivity) rates of EU and non-EU nationals is among the highest in the 27-member bloc. Austria has a good record of industrial harmony between unions, employers and government, underpinned by a consensual system of social dialogue, although this has weakened in recent years. Labour costs are comparatively high. On the whole, regional economic disparities in Austria are fairly modest, but from a labour market perspective there are quite large differences in unemployment rates between regions.
Skills shortages will damage the labour market in the short term
- The unemployment rate increased to 6.1% in 2020 and we expect this trend to continue in the short term, with unemployment reaching 6.6%, amid a more subdued level of economic activity (compared with pre-crisis trends) and significantly weaker demand in sectors hit hardest by the pandemic, such as entertainment, hospitality and travel (which tend to have a higher concentration of lower-wage and less-secure jobs than most other industries). Initial damage to the labour market has been mitigated in part by extensive use of a state subsidised short-time work scheme (similar to the Kurzarbeit in Germany), alongside other support measures. The scheme has been extended until July 2022, with some tightening of conditionality.
- Prior to the pandemic, the Austrian labour market had faced rising skilled labour shortages, which were most evident in technology, manufacturing and consulting, with unfilled positions also an issue in the large tourism sector. This pressure will be significantly reduced in the near term given a much looser labour market, although ongoing rapid technological change implies a risk of a growing digital skills gap. Over the medium term, given Austria's ageing population, policy efforts to address the threat of re-emerging skills and labour shortages across the wider economy are likely to focus on raising the participation of older workers and improving full-time employment opportunities for women (in part by improving childcare provision and through reforms to paternity and parental leave).
- The previous government introduced modest reforms in early 2019 aimed at easing the entry process for skilled migrant workers, but its accompanying hardline policy stance (of tightened controls and curtailed benefits) and rhetoric towards immigration in general implied a less than welcoming environment. The current ÖVP-Green coalition agreement broadly preserves most aspects of this rightward shift. The geopolitical backdrop implies a risk that anti-immigrant sentiment in Austria could harden further over the forecast period, presenting a challenge for firms seeking to attract highly skilled migrant labour.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.3 8.0 11 16 8 10
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The quality of network infrastructure is generally good, particularly that of transport, but there is scope to improve crossborder transit and energy connections, and to strengthen digital connectivity, which although improving still lags some of the country's peers. Austria's regional and global rankings deteriorate, mainly owing to improvements elsewhere. Austria has extensive and good-quality road and rail networks, with good access to west European industrial centres; a well-developed inland waterways system with links to the North Sea and the Black Sea; and a regional air transport hub in Vienna. However, road and rail connections to the country's southern and eastern neighbours are more limited following a long period of underinvestment. This latter point is particularly important in view of the ongoing rise in transit traffic (both east-west and north-south) through Austria, creating bottlenecks and raising environmental concerns over vehicle emissions.
Efforts to shift traffic from road to rail will continue
- In recent years there have been modest policy efforts to shift (mainly transalpine) traffic from road to rail, via new road tolls and rail-freight subsidies. From a regional perspective, the country is a middling performer in terms of digital infrastructure and connectivity, ranking 13th in the EU's 2020 Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI). Mobile and fixed broadband coverage are fairly extensive, and costs are low in competitive markets. However, there is a significant urban-rural broadband divide, with provision and take-up of ultrafast (fibre-based) services in particular well below the regional average. Austria has liberalised electricity and natural-gas markets, diverse renewable energy resources (the largest being hydropower) and a well-developed network of transmission grids for gas, electricity and district heating-although rising renewables generation is placing an increasing strain on the electricity network, implying a need for power-grid expansion. Austria remains supportive of the controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to supply natural gas from Russia to Germany via the Baltic Sea, which has been delayed amid the political pressure from the US. As the US and Germany reached an agreement in July 2021, the project is expected to be completed in the near future.
- At the end of 2020 the government announced plans to modernise national rail infrastructure and pledged EUR17.5 bn to be invested in 2021-26. It has also set a goal to achieve a climate-neutral rail network by 2035. Austrian Federal Railways will electrify domestic lines and, where electrification is not possible, put into operation hydrogen and battery trains. The company also plans to invest in renewable energy production.
- Construction work will continue on a number of major tunnel projects. This includes the 33-km Koralm rail tunnel, which connects the regions of Styria and Carinthia, which is planned to be completed by mid-2020s, and the Brenner Base Tunnel, a 55-km rail tunnel to Italy under the Brenner Pass, co-financed with Italy and the EU, the completion of which has been delayed to the early 2030s. The construction of a tunnel in Lobau near Vienna has been suspended by the Ministry of Environment to assess the potential impact on environment following pressure from the Greens and activist groups.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
9.2 8.9 4 15 2 8
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Austria scores highly for technological readiness, but loses some ground on a global and regional basis in the forecast period amid faster progress elsewhere. Positive features are the high quality of mobile network infrastructure, widespread internet usage, above-average digital skills levels, and a sophisticated (and well-funded) framework for research and innovation. Provision and usage of e-government services are also above the regional average, although Austria continues to lag some of its peers in terms of specific online business administrative processes. Partly linked to this and to the broadband connectivity gaps across the country, another weaker aspect is the modest level of digital adoption by Austrian-based firms, particularly SMEs. Austria performs well on a regional basis in terms of scientific publications and patent applications, but lags most other high-research-and-development-intensity countries in translating its strong innovative capacity into entre-preneurial and commercial activity (as measured by the share of innovative high-tech and knowledge-intensive firms, product sales and exports).

- Austria continued to rank as a "strong innovator" in the European Commission's 2021 Innovation Scoreboard, alongside Germany and France but below a group of four "innovation leaders". According to the Global Cyber-security Index, published by the International Telecommunication Union in 2020, Austria ranked 29th globally (and 15th in the EU) for its commitment and capacity to deal with the increasing threat from cybercrime and cyber-espionage.

Broadband expansion will be a key objective of new digital infrastructure.
- An updated 2030 broadband strategy aims to provide full coverage of ultrafast 100-Mbps broadband connections by end-2020, country-wide availability of fifth-generation (5G) mobile services by 2025 and full coverage of gigabit-capable broadband networks by 2030. Given the existing levels of broadband connectivity, the first milestone of the strategy has not been achieved.

Economic forecast: Policy trends Controlling the spread of the coronavirus, co-ordinating the vaccine rollout and supporting economic activity are the policy priorities for 2021. On May 19th, owing to the low case rate, restaurants, bars, hotels, sports facilities, tourist and entertainment venues, and schools reopened nationwide, in effect ending the national lockdown. The decline in cases has been helped by an acceleration in the rollout of the vaccination programme; as at August 22nd 56.9% of the total population were fully vaccinated, roughly in line with the EU average.
Generous government support measures will have a stimulating effect on the economy; a large part of the relief for lower-income groups is channelled into consumption. On June 7th the government announced plans to reduce the furlough support scheme in July. The government will continue to offer generous financial support-broadly unchanged from previous arrangements-to those businesses hardest hit by the crisis, such as hospitality, while reducing financial support to all other sectors. It will also make it easier for businesses to terminate work contracts.
The coalition has marked out several reform initiatives. Reflecting the balance of representation in parliament, it gives priority to ÖVP policies such as tax cuts over the Greens' priorities such as emissions reduction. The labour market, competitiveness and climate policy will be the areas of focus. To counter the pandemic's impact on Austria's competitiveness, investment incentives in the form of changes to the tax law will play an important role. The Greens see the post-recession recovery measures as an opportunity to accelerate the transition towards a climate-neutral economy. The 2021 budget proposal outlines that an extra EUR263m will be provided in 2021-24 to achieve 100% electricity generation from renewable sources by 2030.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Government expenditure 57.7 53.9 52.6 51.8 52.0 51.9
Government revenue 48.9 46.0 46.9 47.1 49.2 49.1
Budget balance -8.8 -7.9 -5.7 -4.7 -2.8 -2.8
Government debt 83.7 85.3 84.6 83.6 83.2 82.3
Before the coronavirus outbreak Austria was on track to achieve a general government debt ratio of less than 60% of GDP by end-2020, but tackling the fallout from the pandemic has generated a surge in public debt. Despite this, average maturity for federal debt was almost ten years at end-2020, leaving Austria well placed to deal with its heavy debt burden in the long term.
We expect the rebound in growth in the second quarter to continue in the third quarter of 2021, with a positive impact on government revenue. However, prolonged emergency measures on the expenditure side, such as the furlough scheme and transfers to affected businesses, will slow the recovery of the public finances. We forecast a budget deficit of 7.9% of GDP in 2021. We do not expect the budget to return to surplus during our five-year forecast period, but the deficit will narrow gradually and average 4% of GDP in 2022-25. Scarring effects left by the pandemic on potential output will constrain the government's ability to raise revenue, leaving the public finances with a structural deficit by 2023.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Short-term interest rate (av) -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3
Long-term interest rate (av) -0.2 -0.1 -0.6 0.4 0.6 0.7
The monetary policy of the ECB will remain highly accommodative until at least the end of 2023. The deposit rate, which is currently the key ECB interest rate, stands at -0.5%, and we expect it to remain unchanged until end-2024. With interest rates at their effective lower bound, monetary policy will be conducted through quantitative easing (QE). The ECB is running two separate QE programmes: the asset purchase programme (APP), which is open-ended and runs at EUR20bn per month, and the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP), which has a maximum size of EUR1.85trn and a provisional end date of March 2022.
In the second quarter of 2021 the ECB accelerated asset purchases to EUR100bn per month to offset rising long-term interest rates and promised a similar pace of QE during the third quarter. We expect a gradual tapering from October, with an extension of the PEPP until June 2022 to avoid an abrupt correction in bond markets. We assume that monthly QE purchases will decline to EUR80bn in the fourth quarter of 2021 and EUR60bn in the first half of 2022. We expect purchases of about EUR30bn per month in the second half of 2022, under an extended APP, declining to EUR20bn per month in 2023. In 2024 net asset purchases will cease, but the ECB will continue to reinvest maturing bonds. The ECB's balance sheet will begin to shrink only in 2025, when we forecast that euro zone inflation will climb to 1.7%.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Economic growth (%)
US GDP -3.5 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.1
OECD GDP -4.8 4.9 3.8 2.2 2.0 2.0
EU27 GDP -6.2 4.4 4.3 2.5 2.1 1.9
World GDP -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
World trade -8.1 8.9 5.7 4.8 4.3 4.1
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
OECD CPI 1.2 3.0 2.3 2.1 2.0 2.1
EU27 CPI 0.6 2.1 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8
Manufactures (measured in US$) 0.2 7.6 1.8 1.5 2.0 2.5
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 2.9 32.0 -1.6 -0.7 -8.7 -0.1
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6
€ 3-month interbank rate (av; %) -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3
US$:€ (av) 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
¥:€ (av) 121.8 130.3 130.1 128.6 132.8 135.9
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP -6.4 3.8 4.2 2.0 1.4 1.3
Private consumption -9.1 3.6 5.8 2.5 1.5 1.3
Government consumption 2.3 2.7 1.5 1.9 1.9 1.9
Gross fixed investment -5.6 6.5 4.0 1.8 1.6 1.6
Exports of goods & services -10.6 4.8 5.9 3.6 2.1 2.9
Imports of goods & services -9.5 5.3 5.1 3.9 2.0 3.4
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -0.1 0.7 -0.6 0.0 -0.3 0.0
Domestic demand -6.0 4.8 3.7 2.1 1.3 1.5
Agriculture -0.2 -1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 2.5
Industry -5.8 5.0 3.1 1.9 1.6 1.6
Services -6.3 3.3 4.8 2.1 1.3 1.1
The Austrian economy shrank by 6.4% in 2020, primarily owing to the damage sustained to the winter tourism sector, which accounts for about 15% of GDP. After a 1.1% quarterly contraction in January-March 2021, the economy expanded by 4.3% during the second quarter. However, it remained 3.1% smaller than before the coronavirus crisis (the fourth quarter of 2019).
We expect real GDP growth of 3.8% in 2021, driven mostly by exports and private consumption, and a recovery to pre-pandemic levels during the fourth quarter. Recent high-frequency data support this forecast. Signs of a rapid rebound are evident in data series on business sentiment and activity, which have largely returned to pre-pandemic levels. Manufacturing operating conditions in Austria improved at the strongest pace on record in June, with the manufacturing purchasing managers' index (PMI) coming in at 67. In July it stood at 63.9-another considerable expansion. Industrial production jumped by 32.7% in April, the largest annual increase on record, following another strong year-on-year increase, of 20.8%, in May. On the export side, strengthening global demand, particularly from the US and Asia, and the resumption of tourism as domestic restrictions are loosened will spur a revival in activity this year. The external sector is of outsize importance for Austria; its exports account for 52.5% of GDP. Private consumption will rebound, as restrictions have been eased and confidence is rising. With furlough schemes supporting wage growth in 2020, savings rates have increased, which will boost domestic demand.
Several structural factors will support growth in Austria over the rest of the forecast period. Strong political and social institutions, a solid budgetary policy, a diversified and export-oriented economy, and the only moderate indebted-ness of the private sector will all aid the recovery.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends The coronavirus crisis disrupted many of the Austrian economy's most dynamic sectors. As a result, Austria's economy shrank more than other EU countries in 2020. Real GDP contracted by 6.4%, which is a larger contraction than in Germany (4.9%), Belgium (6.2%) or the Netherlands (6.2%). In particular, the services sector, which has the largest share of Austrian output (at 69.9% in 2020), experienced a substantial contraction. The sector's value added contracted by 6.3% in 2020. We expect the sector to rebound by 3.3% this year and by 4.8% in 2022, but structural weaknesses will prevent a full recovery until 2023. The sector comprises both hospitality (including bars and restaurants) and tourism, which have been most affected by the imposition of strict social distancing rules, which weren't fully lifted until May 2021. Hospitality and tourism collectively amounted to over 10% of 2019 GDP on a value-added basis, according to data from the Austrian Institute for Economic Research and the World Travel and Tourism Council, far above the level seen in France and Germany. Despite the severe contraction in services output in 2020, we expect activity to rebound more rapidly than in other tourism-dependent economies, as the sector's strong connections with the robust German economy are accelerating the recovery.
Connections to eastern Europe will support services growth However, exposure to neighbouring Italy, where activity will lag the rest of Europe and the relative weakness of other services (such as technology or the creative arts) will limit the extent of recovery. Beyond the crisis period, proximity to fast-growing eastern Europe should encourage the expansion of the services sector. Many Austrian-domiciled banks and other professional services firms have operations in eastern Europe and we expect the steady development of these economies, despite the shock of the coronavirus crisis, to encourage further growth. We also expect government policy to encourage a steady diversification of the services sector, as fears about an overreliance on tourism have become more pronounced in the midst of both rising environmental concerns and the coronavirus crisis. Additional support could move to the education, pharmaceutical or creative sectors, in addition to further emphasis on technology-based investment highlighted in the recent stimulus measures. Broadly however, we expect that services growth will closely track headline output, growing by an average of roughly 2.5% in 2021-25.
We expect the crisis to accelerate the relative decline of industry. The sector, which comprised roughly 25.4% of activity in 2020, according to the World Bank, has become less prominent in recent decades, falling from 34% of activity in 1976. The disruption to global trade flows, as well as the damage sustained to the neighbouring German economy (into which the manufacturing sector is highly integrated) substantially eroded industrial activity in 2020. Although the sector has rebounded, in line with the wider economy, the development of a post-crisis economy, with a greater reliance on digital infrastructure and less centralised production, is likely to weigh on the growth of industrial output for an extended period. Added to this, concerns surrounding the sources of future external demand, owing to the rise of trade tensions and a growing cleavage in global supply chains, also lower our expectations for longer term growth and for a diversification of Austrian manufacturing away from its German base.
Agriculture remains small as a percentage of GDP, at just 1.3% in 2020, but will continue to be largely untouched by the coronavirus crisis. We expect stronger growth in other sectors will see its share of GDP fall from 1.3% in 2016 to 1.2% by 2025. We expect the sector to grow by an annual average of only 0.9% in 2021-25.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Consumer prices (EU harmonised measure) 1.4 2.4 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0
Average wages 2.3 2.6 2.0 2.2 2.1 2.2
Real wages 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.2 0.2
Unit labour costs 7.2 3.7 -4.4 -2.2 1.8 2.9
Labour costs per hour (US$) 44.8 48.1 48.2 48.4 50.7 53.7
We expect inflation to average 2.4% in 2021, up from 1.4% in 2020. Annual consumer price inflation was at 2.8% in July and June and 3% in May, up from 1.9% in April. Higher prices in the rent, water and energy, and transport categories explain most of the acceleration in inflation in May-July. Over the medium term, we forecast that consumer price inflation will be close to 2%, in line with the ECB's inflation target.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
Exchange rate US$:€ (end-period) 1.23 1.18 1.16 1.15 1.20 1.23
Exchange rate ¥:€ (av) 121.8 130.3 130.1 128.6 132.8 135.9
Real effective exchange rate index (2010=100; av) 103.5 103.9 103.2 102.7 103.1 104.1
Purchasing power parity €:US$ (av) 0.76 0.78 0.77 0.77 0.76 0.76
The euro averaged US$1.21:EUR1 in the first half of the year. Depreciation against the US dollar in March, when the euro zone grappled with renewed pandemic restrictions, was followed by appreciation in April-May. The appreciation resulted from a substantial acceleration in economic activity, improved investor sentiment following a pick-up in vaccinations against the coronavirus and the ultra-loose monetary policy of the Federal Reserve (Fed, the US central bank), which is weighing on the value of the dollar. We expect the euro to end the year at about US$1.18:EUR1, with little change from its end-June value. In 2022-23 we forecast that the euro will depreciate against the dollar; real interest-rate differentials between the euro zone and the US will widen, as the ECB continues asset purchases while the Fed begins to tighten its policy stance. In 2024-25 the euro will appreciate; by then, the ECB will have ended its QE programme and the euro zone will have completed its economic recovery, with rising market rates boosting demand for euro-denominated assets.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Current-account balance 10.8 13.7 14.5 16.5 20.7 23.2
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.5 2.8 2.9 3.2 3.8 4.0
Goods: exports fob 162.0 197.7 211.8 229.7 242.1 262.9
Goods: imports fob -155.9 -189.7 -204.0 -219.2 -228.6 -246.1
Trade balance 6.1 7.9 7.8 10.5 13.5 16.8
Services: credit 64.8 70.2 71.6 76.0 81.8 90.0
Services: debit -55.9 -57.2 -60.1 -63.6 -69.8 -78.1
Services balance 8.9 12.9 11.5 12.4 12.1 11.9
Primary income: credit 16.4 28.4 33.5 35.5 33.2 36.0
Primary income: debit -16.8 -31.8 -34.3 -37.9 -34.5 -38.2
Primary income balance -0.4 -3.4 -0.8 -2.4 -1.2 -2.2
Secondary income: credit 6.7 8.0 8.2 8.4 9.4 10.6
Secondary income: debit -10.4 -11.8 -12.2 -12.4 -13.1 -13.9
Secondary income balance -3.8 -3.8 -3.9 -4.0 -3.7 -3.3
Austria's exports are quite diversified, but as 79% of them go to Europe, one of the regions hit hardest by the pandemic, the effects of the crisis will weigh on export growth over the forecast period. However, we expect a revival in the global travel industry, which will boost tourism exports, and an upswing in regional growth, pushing up the trade surplus. Services will also recover, and the current-account surplus will gradually increase to reach 4% of GDP in 2025, from 2.5% in 2020. Overall, the current-account surplus will average 3.3% of GDP in 2021-25.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Austria Stocks and flows Inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) have risen steadily since Austria joined the EU. Although it remains one of the smaller hosts in western Europe in absolute terms, it has made substantial progress relative to the size of its economy. The stock of FDI increased significantly, from the equivalent of 6.6% of GDP in 1994 (the year before Austria joined the EU) to 55.8% in 2020. FDI inflows posted a record of 25.7% of GDP in 2005, but have since dropped significantly, to a negative 3.7% of GDP on average in 2016-20. FDI outflows followed a similar pattern: after peaking at 9.3% of GDP in 2007 they stood at 2.4% of GDP in 2010, before averaging a negative 1.6% of GDP in 2016-20. The Economist Intelligence Unit has revised downwards the forecasts for the stock of Austrian FDI abroad, owing to the economic disruption caused by the coronavirus pandemic, global trade protectionism, and tightening of regulations across the EU. We now expect the stock of Austrian FDI abroad to rise gradually in the coming years, from US$317.7bn in 2020 to US$499.8bn in 2025.
Origin and distribution Companies in other EU member states have traditionally been the largest inward direct investors, accounting for about 56% of the inward FDI stock in 2020. In terms of stock, Germany, Russia, the US and the Netherlands accounted for almost 60% of Austria's FDI stock in 2019. Central and south-eastern Europe remains an important destination for Austrian FDI outflows, although the stock of outward investment in this region has remained relatively steady in recent years, as companies have been repatriating capital. The region now represents about 29% of the total stock of Austrian outward FDI, compared with 50% in 2008. Professional scientific and technical services activities, and financial intermediation and trade were the sectors in Austria with the greatest foreign investment in 2019. The same was true for Austrian investors abroad, although financial intermediation was by some margin the largest sector for outward foreign investment, largely because of Austrian banks' deep involvement in central and south-eastern Europe.
Determinants Austria's main strengths as a location for FDI are its central location within the EU's single market, its proximity to and historical ties with eastern Europe, its competitive corporate tax rate (25%), an educated and flexible workforce, an excellent labour relations record, advanced information technology (IT) and telecommunications infrastructure, a growing emphasis on research and development (R&D), and a high quality of life. However, negative aspects for Austria are its high level of employers' social security contributions, its significant levels of red tape, and delays in expanding road and rail infrastructure towards eastern Europe. Outward direct investment has been driven in large part by integration with other euro zone economies, particularly Germany, and by the opportunities provided by the opening up of eastern neighbours' economies, although growth in investment into the former has been stronger in recent years.
Impact FDI has increased competitiveness by providing a boost to fixed capital formation and assisting in the diffusion of new technologies and best practices developed in multinational companies. Outward investment, particularly in the financial sector, has helped to promote growth in the banking sector and has diversified risks away from the euro zone, although there have been other problems associated with economies in central and eastern Europe, especially Hungary, Ukraine and Russia. Public opinion remains ambivalent towards inward investment, with some opposition persisting in relation to the sale of "national champions"-notably in the manufacturing and energy sectors-to foreign investors. The introduction at EU level of new measures to screen foreign investment from outside the bloc could further limit the impact of FDI.
Potential Austria's strong links with Germany and central and eastern Europe have historically been viewed as a strength. Although a dependence on the German economy will probably weaken growth in the tourism and manufacturing sectors, as the automotive industry is set to underperform relative to the historical average over the forecast period, the outlook remains positive. Exposure to central and eastern Europe will continue to be beneficial in the midst of the coronavirus crisis, and over the longer term, growth in much of the region is expected to comfortably outpace that of western Europe. Austrian companies' early move into the region has given them the advantage of establishing themselves there as large and respected organisations, and we expect them to benefit from this during the forecast period. Austria is well placed to remain an attractive bridge to central and eastern Europe. The government will continue to seek to attract companies to establish their regional headquarters in Austria, and the country's favourable corporate tax environment and advantages in terms of quality of life serve as a magnet to high-tech companies in the IT sector. However, a lack of competition in some services markets and the need to expand transport links to Austria's eastern neighbours will remain challenges during the forecast period.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2015 2020 2025
Population (m)
Total 8.6 8.7 8.8
 Male 4.2 4.3 4.3
 Female 4.4 4.4 4.4
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 14.0 14.0 14.1
 15-64 67.0 66.1 64.3
 65+ 18.9 19.9 21.6
Young-age dependency ratio 0.21 0.21 0.22
Old-age dependency ratio 0.28 0.30 0.34
Working-age population (m) 5.7 5.7 5.6
Urbanisation (% of total) 57.7 58.7 59.8
Labour force (m) 3.9 4.1 4.0
       
Period averages   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth (%)   0.3 0.2
Working-age population growth (%)   0.0 -0.3
Labour force growth (%)   1.2 -0.4
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   9.7 9.9
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   9.7 9.9
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   3.4 3.3
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   78.7 79.5
 Female   83.6 84.0
 Average   81.2 81.8
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; Economist Intelligence Unit estimates and forecasts; National statistics.
Population growth will be maintained in the coming years Austria's population stood at an estimated 8.9m in 2021 according to Statistics Austria, an increase of around 600,000, or 7%, over the past decade. The data do not match that used in The Economist Intelligence Unit's forecasts, which come from the UN (in order to compare countries) and tend to lag the official data. Despite the initial shock of the coronavirus crisis, we expect population growth to be maintained in the coming years, albeit at a diminished rate compared with previous years. The natural increase of the population (more births than deaths) has played a role in population growth since the mid-1980s, but the main driver in recent years has been migration. According to Statistics Austria, annual net immigration increased from 3,880 people in 1996 to a record 113,067 in 2015. This is largely because of the sizeable intake of refugees in the second half of that year. As this movement came to a halt in the first half of 2016, flows of net migration since then have been more in line with the years before 2015, at an average of 55,900 in 2016-18. Owing to domestic opposition to further inward migration, and disruption to global travel generated by the coronavirus crisis, we expect this source of population growth to continue to be less pronounced in the coming years, a trend already observed in 2020.
Foreign nationals make up larger share of workforce than in other EU states The share of registered foreign nationals in the total population is one of the highest in Europe, at about 17.1% at the start of 2021, up from 10% in 2008. The high proportion of foreign nationals is in part related to the naturalisation process taking longer than in many other EU countries, although the number of people granted citizenship has been increasing fairly rapidly since 2011. About two-thirds of foreign nationals are from non-EU countries, with the bulk of new applications from the former Yugoslavia and Turkey. Measures limiting access to the Austrian labour market for citizens from the ten EU member states that joined in 2004 were removed in April 2011. Restrictions on immigration from Romania and Bulgaria were removed in 2014. The inflow of refugees in 2015-16 led to an increase in people from Syria and Afghanistan, although these two groups together are still slightly outnumbered by people from Romania. Migration remains a politically sensitive issue in Austria, and the government has maintained its hardline stance, despite the admittance of the Greens, who are more dovish on new migrants, into government. The chancellor, Sebastian Kurz, confirmed in August 2021 that Austria would not accept any additional Afghan refugees as a result of the recent Taliban takeover. Historically, Austria has sought limits on migrants at an EU level, but has faced difficulties restricting migration from outside the EU, and there remains little political appetite to curb intra-EU migration. We therefore expect inward migration to continue in the forecast period (2021-25), mostly from newer member states and non-EU states in the region.
As elsewhere in the developed world, the population will age owing to a low, albeit slightly increasing, fertility rate (at 1.55 children born per woman in 2021, compared with 1.39 in 2007). Nevertheless, we expect the population to grow by an average of 0.2% in 2021-25, a slightly slower growth rate than in 2016-20. The ageing population is reflected in our forecast for average life expectancy, which is projected to rise from 81.2 years in 2015-19 to 81.8 years in 2021-25. The number of people aged under 15 is forecast to remain almost unchanged relative to the total population between 2019 and 2024, at just over 14%. Over the same period, however, the proportion of the population aged 65 or over will rise from 19.6% to over 21% of the total.
Faced with a declining pool of young, skilled employees, policymakers have acknowledged the need to boost employment among older workers. Reforms of the state-run pension system are an example of this shift in policy: one of the key aims is to reverse the long-standing trend of early retirement. The effective retirement age is still three years below the statutory level, particularly for men. Currently, retirement is possible from the age of 62 for men and from 60 for women (subject to 40 years of contributions or credits). However, the legal retirement age for women will be gradually brought into line with that for men between 2024 and 2033. Additional measures have been introduced to improve labour market opportunities for older workers (where employment levels at present are below the EU average), including employer incentives to retain and hire older employees, increased funding for retraining schemes and efforts by the Public Employment Service Austria to promote the employability of older workers. As a consequence, the participation rate of those aged 65 years or older has surged from a low of 2.1% in 2004 to 4.7% in 2020, according to the OECD.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Population (m) 8.7 8.7 8.7 8.7 8.7 8.8
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 429.7 486.3 500.2 511.2 537.5 573.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 49,576 55,974 57,434 58,568 61,445 65,432
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 492.6 522.4 556.5 582.0 602.6 621.9
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 56,828 60,123 63,899 66,682 68,890 70,932
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 249.0 264.7 270.1 274.8 290.0 308.7
Median household income (US$) 56,931 62,483 62,794 62,494 65,338 68,920
Household consumption (US$ bn) 215.4 242.8 253.2 259.0 273.3 290.9
Household consumption per head (US$) 24,850 27,950 29,080 29,680 31,240 33,180
Exports of goods & services (% change) -10.6 4.8 5.9 3.6 2.1 2.9
Imports of goods & services (% change) -9.5 5.3 5.1 3.9 2.0 3.4
Solid labour markets will support accelerating consumption growth Austria is a wealthy country by international standards. GDP per head measured on a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis was US$60,200 in 2019, and US$56,830 in 2020, well above the EU average. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects Austria's relative position to recede over the forecast period (2021-25), as the strength of the contraction in western Europe will be greater than that seen in the east. However, we expect the eventual recovery to prove robust, owing to the economy's connections with a resilient Germany. As a result, at US$71,932 in 2025, Austria's GDP per head on a PPP basis means that it will remain one of the continent's (and, by extension, the world's) wealthiest countries. Looking beyond the initial shock from coronavirus, although growth in private consumption has been solid in recent years, averaging 1.4% from 2016-20, the persistent disruption to the industrial and trade sectors will weaken this trend. After a strong contraction in consumer spending of 9.1% in 2020, we expect a revival of 3.1% in 2021 and 5.6% in 2022, as a result of high savings rates, which will be gradually spent. Consumption growth will be weakened by reversals in the labour market, although the implementation of tax cuts later in the government's term will add an impetus to consumption growth.
Austria is among the most advanced countries in the world in terms of its telecommunications and internet infrastructure. Total spending on information technology (IT) should grow by more than overall demand over the forecast period, reflecting the increased take-up of internet telephony, broadband and wireless services. In the past Austria has lagged regional peers in providing innovative technology on a wide scale, but the slight acceleration of economic growth and incomes will help to support demand for the latest innovative products. However, the country's small market size, albeit improved by good connections with wider EU markets, will weigh on innovation in strategically important sectors (such as digital infrastructure) over the forecast period.
Austria's score in the market opportunities category of our business environment rankings improves slightly over the forecast period, to 6.6 out of 10 (up from 6.3 in 2015-19). This reflects the boost that future tax cuts will give to consumption, and Austria's advanced telecommunications infrastructure.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 32,081 32,955 33,824 34,227 35,693 37,461
Housing & household fuels 48,440 55,560 57,652 58,999 61,718 65,098
Clothing & footwear 12,054 13,077 13,379 13,543 14,077 14,713
Household goods & services 14,983 16,021 16,485 16,766 17,474 18,328
Health 8,394 9,712 10,158 10,465 11,031 11,738
Transport & communications 29,370 34,554 36,281 37,445 39,703 42,549
Leisure & education 23,655 26,217 27,287 27,883 29,314 31,086
Hotels & restaurants 29,507 32,074 33,401 34,270 36,124 38,424
Other 16,950 22,628 24,739 25,420 28,166 31,508
Total 215,434 242,798 253,206 259,018 273,300 290,906
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 14.9 13.6 13.4 13.2 13.1 12.9
Housing & household fuels 22.5 22.9 22.8 22.8 22.6 22.4
Clothing & footwear 5.6 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.2 5.1
Household goods & services 7.0 6.6 6.5 6.5 6.4 6.3
Health 3.9 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0
Transport & communications 13.6 14.2 14.3 14.5 14.5 14.6
Leisure & education 11.0 10.8 10.8 10.8 10.7 10.7
Hotels & restaurants 13.7 13.2 13.2 13.2 13.2 13.2
Other 7.9 9.3 9.8 9.8 10.3 10.8
Demographic trends will influence spending patterns in coming years Austria is a mature consumer market, but demographic trends will have a large influence on spending patterns over the forecast period. With a high (and rising) life expectancy and a declining fertility rate, Austria's population is ageing in line with other advanced economies. Although the total population is set to grow over the next decade and beyond, the proportion of those between 15 and 64 will drop slightly, and the proportion of those aged 65 and over will rise. Austria's changing demographic profile, allied to sociological trends (such as the increase in single-person households), should support continued growth in demand for housing, transport, communications, healthcare and leisure services. Income inequalities across Austria are lower than the west European average, with the Gini coefficient recorded at just 0.31, compared with 0.35 in the UK and 0.29 in Germany, which should also support consumer spending.
As is common in other advanced economies, an increasing share of spending is moving online, spurred by the coronavirus crisis. E-commerce has supported aggregate turnover in the midst of the crisis as retailers invested in their online presence. Nevertheless, the Austrian consumer market has been slightly slower than most of its regional peers in its pick-up of new technologies, and it lags slightly in the development of the e-commerce environment. As a consequence, going forward, there is slightly more opportunity in this area in Austria than in most other western European economies.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2020   2025  
  Austria Western Europe (av) Austria Western Europe (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 11.2 10.8 10.7 10.7
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 5,553 4,415 7,099 5,875
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 3.3 3.4 3.2 3.3
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 5.4 4.0 5.6 4.1
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 14.9 19.5 12.9 18.4
Meat consumption (kg per person) 91.8 86.4 98.6 94.5
Milk consumption (litres per person) 260.0 258.0 275.0 276.0
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 9.8 6.1 10.4 6.5
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 569 544 563 557
Telephone main lines 416 409 371 372
Mobile phone subscribers 1,250 1,210 1,320 1,260
Television sets 1,394 823 1,575 908
Personal computers 916 832 993 859
Households
No. of households (m) 3,986.0 191,390.0 4,171.0 199,310.0
No. of people per household (av) 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.1
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 56,930 49,780 68,920 58,370
Average monthly wage (US$) 4,410 3,850 5,280 4,620
Gini index 30.8 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); Economist Intelligence Unit estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population 0.19 -0.02 0.05
Working-age population -0.56 -0.39 -0.45
Working-age minus total population -0.75 -0.37 -0.50
Labour force 0.27 0.05 0.12
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 1.8 1.6 1.7
Growth of real GDP 2.0 1.5 1.7
Labour productivity growth 1.0 1.5 1.3
Growth of capital stock 2.4 1.5 1.8
Total factor productivity growth 0.5 1.0 0.8
Initial conditions: Austria is a wealthy country. Compared with some other high-income countries, it saw relatively good productivity growth in the period up to 2008, owing to reforms enacted at the beginning of the 2000s. These reforms helped to strengthen the long-term sustainability of the state pension system, lower the tax burden and improve the competitiveness of Austrian companies. However, progress on reform has stalled in recent years, and trends in productivity have been broadly negative since 2010. A number of areas still require attention if Austria is to raise its long-term growth potential. These include increasing product and labour market flexibility, boosting labour force participation rates, raising education standards, reducing high drop-out rates in tertiary education, lowering the tax on labour and continued reform of the banking sector. Although The Economist Intelligence Unit's core forecast assumes some progress in many of these areas, we nevertheless expect slightly slower total factor productivity in Austria than in a number of its regional peers, notably Germany, owing to frictions in labour and product markets
Demographic trends: The total population should grow slightly, by an average of just under 0.05% per year, over the long-term forecast period (2021-50), owing to inward migration flows and a higher life expectancy. However, as in other European economies, the population will steadily age in 2021-50. As a result, the working-age population will decline by an average of 0.4% per year in 2021-50, and so the share of the working-age population in the total population will decline from 65.5% in 2020 to about 60.8% by 2030, significantly increasing the old-age dependency ratio. To avoid a sizeable contraction in the workforce, Austria must raise its labour force participation rate, especially of older workers, as the retirement age is lower than some of its regional peers, such as Germany or Switzerland. A major issue in the future will be how to finance the rising burden on public finance, particularly given the marked increase in public debt generated by the coronavirus crisis. To some extent, this is being addressed by pension reforms that came into force at the beginning of 2014. Increased net migration is also a (short-term) option, but the still-hostile political climate on immigration will limit the scope for this.
External conditions: Austria stands to benefit from the faster expected growth rates of the EU's newer member states in central and eastern Europe over the coming decades, given its strong trade links in the region. Trade relations are expected to be further enhanced as they become more fully integrated, despite continued political conflict between the new member states and the western EU members. However, Austria will remain dependent on the older member states of the EU for its exports. A large downside risk to our long-term forecast is the erosion of the existing global trade system. This could be caused by a protracted recessions in Austria's main trading partners emerging from the coronavirus pandemic and rising global protectionism.
Institutions and policy trends: Austria is a stable democracy with a well entrenched rule of law that has underpinned macroeconomic stability over recent decades. Since the second world war, politics has largely been conducted as a system of grand bargains between the centre-right and the centre-left, which led to a stable political environment and few sharp changes in policy. The system of social partnership, offering trade unions and employers co-operative roles in aspects of economic policymaking, plays an important part in ensuring political and social stability. Although this system will probably decline in importance as the traditional mainstream parties loosen their monopoly on political power-reflected in the inclusion in government of the Greens-we expect the political system to remain relatively stable. Significant reforms in the early 2000s saw Austria attempt to liberalise sheltered sectors of the economy, privatise and slim down the public sector, and encourage entrepreneurship. Liberalisation of the telecommunications sector has proceeded fairly well, but a high degree of state ownership and regulation remains in the electricity sector, and reforms of competition in services have been slow. The increasingly fluid political landscape has the potential to lead to limited reform in some areas, although some of this could be counter-productive, especially with regard to the free movement of labour and goods.
Long-term performance: Overall, long-term prospects for the Austrian economy are broadly in line with much of the rest of the euro zone. We expect real GDP per head to grow by an average of 1.7% in 2021-50, above that of France and Italy, with headline GDP growing at 1.7% over the same period. The demographic profile is not as challenging as for some other euro zone countries (notably Germany), but will nevertheless act as a drag on long-term headline growth prospects. Continued progress on pensions, labour market and healthcare reform will be crucial in this regard. Greater competition in services would boost long-term growth prospects. Faced with global competition, increasing investment in education and improving the outcomes of research and development (R&D) activity will be crucial. There is now a stronger emphasis on R&D (Austria is third in the EU in terms of R&D spending as a percentage of GDP, at 3.2% in 2020), and education reform is aimed at accelerating the transition to a knowledge-based economy. A particular challenge will be raising the educational standards of second- and third-generation immigrants, and integrating the large numbers of recently arrived asylum-seekers into the labour market. An increase in the number of older workers should stimulate growth and employment in traditional sectors of the economy, but there may be a shortage of skilled labour in areas such as information and communications technology and biotechnology.
Income and market size
  2020 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 8.7 8.8 8.8
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 429.7 697.7 1,423.1
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 49,580 78,970 161,860
Private consumption (US$ bn) 215.4 360.2 800.6
Private consumption per head (US$) 24,850 40,760 91,060
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 492.6 750.0 1,547.5
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 56,830 84,890 176,010
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 225.7 431.1 1,117.1
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 211.5 411.9 1,139.0
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 89.8 89.9 96.2
Share of world population (%) 0.1 0.1 0.1
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.5 0.5 0.4
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.4 0.3 0.3
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 1.0 1.0 0.8
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability Austria's mountainous topography and its hydroelectric energy infrastructure (in place since the 1940s) ensure that the country is in a stronger position than others in the region to handle the ramifications of a rise in global temperatures. The Economist Intelligence Unit's climate model, which estimates the cost to GDP from continued climate change relative to a counterfactual where there is no change in global temperatures, finds that output by 2050 will be 1% lower owing to the effects from climate change-a smaller reduction than in other European countries such as the Netherlands and France. This is in part due to Austria's landlocked geography, which insulates it from a rise in sea levels, but it is also a consequence of its small (albeit efficient) agricultural sector and the country's reliance on services that will be relatively unaffected by the impact of climate change (such as tourism and financial services). Nonetheless, risks stem from more variable rainfall, which will strain the country's hydroelectric energy infrastructure, and the use of the Danube as an effective waterway for Austrian industry (as water levels in rivers and canals will become more unreliable).
Under EU proposals to meet the obligations of the international Paris Agreement, an agreement within the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) designed to limit global warming to less than 2°C, Austria is obligated to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases by 16% by 2020 and 36% by 2030 from its 2005 level. The government has also introduced an accelerated timetable for carbon neutrality (by 2040, ten years ahead of the EU's goal). Some progress has been made with the 2020 objective, as emissions in 2018 were 16.8% below its 2005 level, but the International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that if the current trend is not adjusted, Austria may only achieve a reduction of 27%. In May 2018 the then government published a national climate and energy strategy, as required by the EU, setting out how it intends to achieve its 2030 targets. The current government has substantially increased its ambition to achieve such objectives, but reforms have been halted owing to the coronavirus pandemic. The strategy foresees a range of measures and investments across different sectors, rather than any overarching headline reform. The most ambitious goal is in the energy sector, with a target (inherited from the previous government) to achieve 100% of electricity from renewable sources. However, achieving this target will still require significant infrastructure investment, notably in new renewables generation, energy storage and energy efficiency, which is particularly difficult given the lukewarm political consensus surrounding greenhouse gas reduction. The Austrian People's Party (ÖVP)-Greens coalition plans more robust environmental policies, including greater support for green energy and public transport, and a flat¬rate air passenger tax of EUR12 per flight. The government also plans to put an additional price on carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, which will be in place by 2022. Under the "Mission 2030" strategy to achieve EU climate goals, electric transport will expand significantly over the next decade, with the aim of electrifying 85% of train services and significantly raising the number of electric vehicles in private use (partly via subsidies) and for public transport.
Migration and urbanisation Migration has been a key theme in Austrian politics since the migrant crisis of 2015, where the country served as a major staging post for migrants entering western Europe. Although there has been some history of migration in Austria, a side effect of the country's links with eastern Europe-formed during the Habsburg Empire-and its neutrality in the Cold War, these trends were relatively minor compared with the large numbers of migrants seen from January-June 2015, chiefly from Syria and Afghanistan. The ratio of migrants to the general population remains high by regional standards, according to Eurostat data, at roughly 12.7 per 1,000 inhabitants, above Germany (11.1) and the UK (9.8), but not as high as in Sweden (14.4) or Malta (46.3). The political tumult following the spike in migration, leading to a surge in popularity for the anti-migrant Freedom Party (FPÖ), and the practical difficulties of integrating existing migrants into the workforce will be likely to curtail efforts to admit more migrants into Austria over the forecast period (2020-24). Nonetheless, population growth encouraged by the rise in immigration should improve Austria's demographic profile over the forecast horizon. The ÖVP-FPÖ coalition government shifted integration and immigration policy firmly to the right, tightening migration controls, curtailing benefits for asylum-seekers and cutting childcare benefits for non-German (or English) speakers. The ÖVP-Green coalition agreement broadly preserves this rightward shift on migration policy (largely owing to the strength of the ÖVP in parliament), proposing "precautionary detention" for potentially dangerous asylum-seekers and return centres for asylum seekers who have had their claims rejected.
In contrast with other advanced economies, the urbanisation rate is below its recorded level in 1960, as the availability of tourism jobs in rural areas has inverted the rural-urban poverty trend of Europe as a whole. The urbanisation rate stood at 65.4% in 1980 and steadily fell, reaching 57.1% in 2010, according to World Bank data. Since then urban populations have revived, partly owing to the growth of the capital, Vienna, as a regional hub for tourism and finance, and in 2019 urbanisation rates stood at 58.5%. The growth of the tourism and financial sectors should support this trend towards greater urban populations, albeit subject to healthy regional growth. Although Vienna should experience the bulk of these improvements, the growth of these sectors should also encourage the development of smaller Austrian cities, such as Graz and Salzburg, which are connected with the tourism sector.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 2.5 3.2 2.9 2.3 -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
EU27 GDP growth 2.0 2.9 2.1 1.7 -6.2 4.4 4.3 2.5 2.1 1.9
Western Europe growth 1.9 2.8 1.9 1.4 -6.2 4.6 4.3 2.3 2.0 1.9
World trade growth 2.1 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 8.9 5.7 4.8 4.3 4.1
US CPI 1.3 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
EU27 CPI 0.2 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.1 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8
Manufactures export price -2.2 1.9 5.1 -1.4 0.2 7.6 1.8 1.5 2.0 2.5
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 44.0 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3
US$:€ (av) 1.11 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
¥:€ (av) 120.4 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 130.3 130.1 128.6 132.8 135.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Expenditure on GDP (€ bn at current market prices)
GDP 357.5 369.5 385.2 397.4 376.5 407.3 427.5 445.5 457.5 472.1
Private consumption 186.9 193.9 200.0 205.3 188.8 203.3 216.4 225.7 232.6 239.4
Government consumption 70.2 72.0 74.5 77.2 80.4 84.5 87.2 90.4 93.9 97.6
Gross fixed investment 82.6 87.1 92.4 97.9 93.9 101.8 107.1 111.6 115.2 118.9
Exports of goods & services 187.4 201.2 215.0 221.3 197.8 227.1 246.4 260.8 260.5 268.1
Imports of goods & services 173.6 188.7 201.8 207.5 185.3 215.1 232.9 246.2 246.9 254.1
Stockbuilding 4.2 4.5 6.0 3.1 1.1 5.5 3.3 3.2 2.2 2.2
Domestic demand 343.9 357.5 372.8 383.6 364.2 395.2 414.0 430.9 443.9 458.1
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 395.7 417.3 455.1 444.9 429.7 486.3 500.2 511.2 537.5 573.6
Private consumption 206.8 219.0 236.3 229.9 215.4 242.8 253.2 259.0 273.3 290.9
Government consumption 77.7 81.3 88.0 86.4 91.7 100.9 102.0 103.8 110.3 118.6
Gross fixed investment 91.4 98.4 109.1 109.6 107.2 121.6 125.4 128.0 135.3 144.4
Exports of goods & services 207.4 227.3 254.0 247.8 225.7 271.2 288.3 299.2 306.1 325.8
Imports of goods & services 192.2 213.2 238.5 232.3 211.5 256.8 272.5 282.5 290.2 308.8
Stockbuilding 4.6 5.1 7.1 3.5 1.3 6.6 3.9 3.7 2.6 2.7
Domestic demand 380.5 403.7 440.5 429.5 415.6 471.9 484.4 494.5 521.5 556.6
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 52.3 52.5 51.9 51.7 50.1 49.9 50.6 50.7 50.8 50.7
Government consumption 19.6 19.5 19.3 19.4 21.3 20.8 20.4 20.3 20.5 20.7
Gross fixed investment 23.1 23.6 24.0 24.6 24.9 25.0 25.1 25.0 25.2 25.2
Stockbuilding 1.2 1.2 1.6 0.8 0.3 1.4 0.8 0.7 0.5 0.5
Exports of goods & services 52.4 54.5 55.8 55.7 52.5 55.8 57.6 58.5 57.0 56.8
Imports of goods & services 48.6 51.1 52.4 52.2 49.2 52.8 54.5 55.3 54.0 53.8
Memorandum items
National savings ratio (%) 27.0 26.1 26.9 28.3 27.8 29.2 28.7 29.0 29.5 29.7
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Real expenditure on GDP (€ bn at chained 2010 prices)
GDP 351.1 359.8 368.9 374.2 350.3 363.5 378.9 386.6 392.1 397.0
Private consumption 184.2 187.8 189.8 191.3 173.9 180.1 190.5 195.2 198.1 200.7
Government consumption 69.3 69.9 70.8 71.8 73.4 75.4 76.5 78.0 79.5 81.0
Gross fixed investment 81.5 84.8 88.2 91.6 86.4 92.1 95.7 97.5 99.0 100.6
Exports of goods & services 188.2 199.0 208.8 214.9 192.1 201.3 213.1 220.9 225.4 231.9
Imports of goods & services 176.1 186.4 194.9 199.7 180.9 190.4 200.0 207.9 212.0 219.2
Stockbuilding (% of GDP) 4.1 c 4.4 c 5.8 c 3.1 c 2.6 c 5.0 3.0 3.0 2.0 2.0
Domestic demand 339.1 c 346.8 c 354.5 c 357.8 c 336.4 c 352.6 365.8 373.6 378.6 384.3
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 2.0 2.5 2.5 1.4 -6.4 3.8 4.2 2.0 1.4 1.3
Private consumption 1.6 1.9 1.1 0.8 -9.1 3.6 5.8 2.5 1.5 1.3
Government consumption 1.8 0.9 1.2 1.4 2.3 2.7 1.5 1.9 1.9 1.9
Gross fixed investment 4.3 4.0 4.0 3.9 -5.6 6.5 4.0 1.8 1.6 1.6
Exports of goods & services 2.6 5.7 4.9 2.9 -10.6 4.8 5.9 3.6 2.1 2.9
Imports of goods & services 3.8 5.8 4.6 2.5 -9.5 5.3 5.1 3.9 2.0 3.4
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.1 c 0.1 c 0.4 c -0.7 c -0.1 c 0.7 -0.6 0.0 -0.3 0.0
Domestic demand 2.4 c 2.3 c 2.2 c 0.9 c -6.0 c 4.8 3.7 2.1 1.3 1.5
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 0.8 1.0 0.6 0.4 -4.7 1.8 2.9 1.2 0.8 0.7
Government consumption 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4
Gross fixed investment 1.0 0.9 1.0 0.9 -1.4 1.6 1.0 0.5 0.4 0.4
External balance -0.5 0.2 0.3 0.3 -1.0 -0.1 0.6 0.0 0.1 -0.2
Memorandum items
Real personal disposable income (% change) 2.7 1.6 1.4 1.3 -3.0 -2.3 3.5 1.9 1.5 1.3
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Origin of GDP (€ bn at constant 2010 prices)
GDP at factor cost 313.0 321.1 329.9 334.5 314.3 326.2 340.0 346.9 351.8 356.3
Agriculture 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.4 4.5
Industry 89.3 92.8 96.6 98.0 92.3 96.9 99.9 101.8 103.5 105.1
Services 219.7 224.1 229.0 232.2 217.6 224.9 235.7 240.7 243.9 246.5
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 2.1 5.6 3.6 -1.0 -0.2 -1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 2.5
Industry 3.2 3.9 4.0 1.5 -5.8 5.0 3.1 1.9 1.6 1.6
Services 1.5 2.0 2.2 1.4 -6.3 3.3 4.8 2.1 1.3 1.1
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) 2.6 4.9 4.8 0.4 -5.6 8.0 3.9 2.2 1.9 1.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 0.5 0.6 0.2 0.0 -4.4 1.7 2.6 0.6 0.9 0.9
Total factor productivity growth 0.3 0.4 0.1 -0.5 -5.6 1.7 2.3 0.3 0.3 0.2
Growth of capital stock 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 1.7 2.2 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.2
Growth of potential GDP 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.0 2.1 3.0 1.0 0.9 0.6
Growth of real GDP 2.0 2.5 2.5 1.4 -6.4 3.8 4.2 2.0 1.4 1.3
Growth of real GDP per head 1.7 2.2 2.2 1.2 -6.6 c 3.5 4.0 1.8 1.2 1.0
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 8.6 8.6 8.6 8.6 b 8.7 8.7 8.7 8.7 8.7 8.8
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 395.7 417.3 455.1 444.9 429.7 a 486.3 500.2 511.2 537.5 573.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 46,117 48,508 52,766 51,453 49,576 55,974 57,434 58,568 61,445 65,432
Private consumption (US$ bn) 206.8 219.0 236.3 229.9 215.4 a 242.8 253.2 259.0 273.3 290.9
Private consumption per head (US$) 24,102 25,453 27,393 26,584 24,854 27,946 29,076 29,676 31,242 33,182
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 460.2 476.8 504.1 520.6 492.6 a 522.4 556.5 582.0 602.6 621.9
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 53,642 55,426 58,448 60,200 56,828 60,123 63,899 66,682 68,890 70,932
GDP (€ bn) 357.5 369.5 385.2 397.4 376.5 407.3 427.5 445.5 457.5 472.1
Private consumption (€ bn) 186.9 193.9 200.0 205.3 188.8 203.3 216.4 225.7 232.6 239.4
Personal disposable income (€ bn) 201.3 208.2 215.4 222.3 218.2 221.7 230.9 239.5 246.8 254.0
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 222.7 235.1 254.5 248.9 249.0 264.7 270.1 274.8 290.0 308.7
Growth of real disposable income (%) 2.7 1.6 1.4 1.3 -3.0 -2.3 3.5 1.9 1.5 1.3
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.12 0.11 0.11 0.11 b 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.11
Share of world GDP (%; market exchange rates) 0.52 0.52 0.53 0.51 0.51 a 0.52 0.51 0.50 0.50 0.50
Share of world GDP (%; PPP) 0.40 0.40 0.39 0.39 0.38 a 0.37 0.37 0.37 0.36 0.35
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.93 0.91 0.93 0.93 0.95 a 0.95 0.95 0.99 1.00 1.02
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 50.1 49.3 48.8 48.6 57.7 53.9 52.6 51.8 52.0 51.9
Interest 2.1 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.6 1.9
Non-interest 48.0 47.4 47.1 47.2 56.4 52.7 51.3 50.4 50.3 50.0
Government revenue 48.5 48.5 48.9 49.2 48.9 46.0 46.9 47.1 49.2 49.1
Budget balance -1.5 -0.8 0.2 0.6 -8.8 -7.9 -5.7 -4.7 -2.8 -2.8
Primary balance 0.5 1.0 1.8 2.0 -7.5 -6.7 -4.4 -3.3 -1.2 -0.9
Government debt 82.9 78.4 74.1 70.5 83.7 85.3 84.6 83.6 83.2 82.3
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.11 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
Exchange rate US$:€ (year-end) 1.05 1.20 1.15 1.12 1.23 1.18 1.16 1.15 1.20 1.23
Exchange rate ¥:€ (av) 120.4 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 130.3 130.1 128.6 132.8 135.9
Exchange rate ¥:€ (year-end) 123.1 135.1 125.6 122.1 126.6 130.4 129.6 130.1 135.5 136.3
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 99.8 100.8 102.8 101.7 103.5 103.9 103.2 102.7 103.1 104.1
Purchasing power parity €:US$ (av) 0.78 0.78 0.76 0.76 0.76 0.78 0.77 0.77 0.76 0.76
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 6.3 4.7 7.9 4.4 9.3 1.3 -3.6 -1.8 3.7 4.7
Domestic credit growth (%) 7.9 0.9 3.3 3.5 6.1 -0.3 -5.2 -3.4 2.1 3.1
Lending rate (av; %) 1.9 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5
Short-term interest rate (av; %) -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3
Long-term interest rate (av; %) 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.1 -0.2 -0.1 -0.6 0.4 0.6 0.7
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 3.9 4.0 4.1 4.1 c 4.1 c 4.1 4.1 4.1 4.1 4.0
Labour force (% change) 1.4 1.3 1.5 1.1 c 0.7 c -0.6 -0.3 -0.2 -0.3 -0.7
Employment (m) 3.6 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.7 3.8 3.9 3.9 3.9 3.9
Employment (% change) 1.5 1.9 2.4 1.5 -2.1 2.0 1.6 1.4 0.5 0.4
Unemployment (m) 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1
Unemployment rate (av; %; national measure) 9.1 8.5 7.7 7.4 9.9 7.6 5.8 4.3 3.5 2.5
Unemployment rate (av; %; EU/OECD standardised measure) 6.5 5.9 5.2 4.8 6.1 6.6 5.8 4.5 4.0 3.5
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
GDP deflator 1.8 0.8 1.7 1.7 1.2 4.2 0.7 2.1 1.3 1.9
Consumer prices (av; EU harmonised measure) 1.0 2.2 2.1 1.5 1.4 2.4 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0
Producer prices (av) -2.3 4.6 4.2 -0.1 -4.1 5.7 3.8 2.0 2.1 2.1
GDP deflator (av) 1.8 0.8 1.7 1.7 c 1.2 c 4.2 0.7 2.1 1.3 1.9
Private consumption deflator (av) 1.5 1.8 2.0 1.9 c 1.1 c 4.0 0.6 1.8 1.5 1.6
Government consumption deflator (av) 1.4 1.5 2.2 2.2 c 1.8 c 2.4 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0
Fixed investment deflator (av) 1.3 1.4 1.9 2.1 c 1.6 c 1.8 1.2 2.3 1.6 1.6
Average nominal wages 1.6 1.5 2.7 3.0 2.3 2.6 2.0 2.2 2.1 2.2
Average real wages 0.6 -0.8 0.6 1.5 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.2 0.2
Unit labour costs (€-based; av) -0.7 -0.9 0.7 1.3 5.2 -0.9 -2.4 -0.2 -0.6 -0.5
Unit labour costs (US$-based) -1.0 1.1 5.4 -4.0 7.2 3.7 -4.4 -2.2 1.8 2.9
Labour costs per hour (€) 35.4 36.0 37.0 38.2 39.2 40.3 41.2 42.2 43.2 44.2
Labour costs per hour (US$) 39.2 40.7 43.8 42.8 44.8 48.1 48.2 48.4 50.7 53.7
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 10.8 5.6 6.0 12.7 10.8 13.7 14.5 16.5 20.7 23.2
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.7 1.4 1.3 2.8 2.5 2.8 2.9 3.2 3.8 4.0
Goods: exports fob 145.6 158.3 177.5 170.8 162.0 197.7 211.8 229.7 242.1 262.9
Goods: imports fob -142.6 -157.0 -175.0 -167.5 -155.9 -189.7 -204.0 -219.2 -228.6 -246.1
Trade balance 2.9 1.2 2.6 3.3 6.1 7.9 7.8 10.5 13.5 16.8
Services: credit 61.4 67.1 75.8 76.4 64.8 70.2 71.6 76.0 81.8 90.0
Services: debit -49.7 -55.9 -63.8 -65.3 -55.9 -57.2 -60.1 -63.6 -69.8 -78.1
Services balance 11.7 11.3 11.9 11.0 8.9 12.9 11.5 12.4 12.1 11.9
Primary income: credit 31.1 27.5 29.8 33.8 16.4 28.4 33.5 35.5 33.2 36.0
Primary income: debit -31.2 -31.3 -33.9 -31.6 -16.8 -31.8 -34.3 -37.9 -34.5 -38.2
Primary income balance -0.1 -3.8 -4.1 2.2 -0.4 -3.4 -0.8 -2.4 -1.2 -2.2
Secondary income: credit 5.6 6.2 6.3 6.2 6.7 8.0 8.2 8.4 9.4 10.6
Secondary income: debit -9.4 -9.2 -10.7 -10.1 -10.4 -11.8 -12.2 -12.4 -13.1 -13.9
Secondary income balance -3.8 -3.0 -4.4 -3.9 -3.8 -3.8 -3.9 -4.0 -3.7 -3.3
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 91.7 96.4 103.6 99.7 101.9 119.8 120.7 121.0 119.4 122.6
Export prices (% change) 0.8 5.1 7.5 -3.8 2.3 17.5 0.7 0.3 -1.3 2.7
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 94.6 100.9 110.1 105.8 107.6 127.1 129.1 128.7 128.0 130.5
Import prices (% change) 0.6 6.7 9.1 -4.0 1.7 18.1 1.5 -0.3 -0.6 2.0
Terms of trade (2010=100) 97.0 95.5 94.1 94.2 94.7 94.3 93.5 94.0 93.3 93.9
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 4.2 5.6 4.4 2.0 -6.0 7.4 5.4 4.3 3.8 3.6
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment -28.9 13.5 -28.6 -8.1 -27.0 -19.7 -12.2 -3.4 3.1 8.4
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) -7.3 3.2 -6.3 -1.8 -6.3 -4.1 -2.4 -0.7 0.6 1.5
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) -31.7 13.7 -26.2 -7.4 -25.2 -16.2 -9.8 -2.7 2.3 5.8
Outward direct investment 26.9 -10.1 26.6 0.7 14.8 -3.1 -2.2 -1.4 -0.3 0.7
Net foreign direct investment -2.0 3.4 -2.0 -7.4 -12.2 -22.8 -14.5 -4.8 2.8 9.1
Stock of foreign direct investment 244.9 315.2 274.3 266.8 239.8 220.1 207.8 204.4 207.6 216.0
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 28,539 36,633 31,802 30,854 27,664 25,330 23,866 23,421 23,726 24,635
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 61.9 75.5 60.3 60.0 55.8 45.3 41.6 40.0 38.6 37.7
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) -1.07 0.62 -5.82 -0.62 -2.11 -1.40 -0.82 -0.22 0.19 0.50
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.87 1.05 0.86 0.78 0.72 0.60 0.53 0.50 0.49 0.49
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data are for historical data; The Economist Intelligence Unit is the source for all forecast data unless otherwise stated
Global data OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: EIU aggregate
OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IFS
3-month Euribor: IFS
Domestic data GDP: Eurostat
Population: Statistics Austria
Consumer prices: Eurostat
Average hourly earnings: MEI
Industrial production: MEI
Exchange rates and interest rates: IFS
External trade: IFS
Unemployment rate: Statistics Austria
General government budget balance: Eurostat
Foreign direct investment: IFS
Abbreviations EIU: Economist Intelligence Unit
IFS: IMF, International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
MEI: OECD, Main Economic Indicators
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows The Economist Intelligence Unit to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by The Economist Intelligence Unit for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2016-20) and from Economist Intelligence Unit assessments for the forecast period (2021-25). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by The Economist Intelligence Unit for 2016-20. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2021-25 are based on Economist Intelligence Unit assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; The Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2016-20 ranges are then used to derive 2021-25 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2021-25, not to the likely situation in 2025 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2018 or 2023). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2016-20   2021-25  
  Austria Regional average a Austria Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 5 4.6 5 4.7
  2. Risk of social unrest 4 4.1 4 3.9
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 5 4.8 5 4.8
  4. Government and opposition 5 4.2 4 4.1
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 5 4.1 3 3.9
  6. International disputes or tensions 4 3.9 4 3.8
  7. Government policy towards business 4 3.9 4 3.8
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 4 3.6 4 3.4
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 4 3.7 4 3.8
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 4 3.9 4 4.0
 11. Efficiency of legal system 4 3.9 4 3.9
 12. Corruption 4 3.9 4 4.1
 13. Impact of crime 5 4.1 5 4.2
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 5 4.9 5 4.9
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 4 4.0 3 3.6
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 3 2.7 2 2.7
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 5 4.5 4 4.2
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 5 4.4 5 4.4
  6. Quality of policymaking 4 3.7 4 4.1
  7. Institutional underpinnings 5 4.6 5 4.6
  8. Asset prices 2 2.3 3 2.3
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 4 4.0 4 4.1
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 5 4.9 5 4.9
  3. Real GDP growth* 1 1.6 3 3.1
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 4 3.7 4 3.8
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 1 1.3 2 2.4
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 1 1.3 2 2.6
  7. The natural resource endowment* 3 3.3 3 3.3
  8. Profitability* 1 1.8 3 3.3
  9. Regional integration 5 4.8 5 4.7
 10. Proximity to markets 5 4.7 5 4.2
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 5 4.7 5 4.8
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 4 3.8 4 4.0
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 4 3.9 4 4.0
  4. Promotion of competition 3 3.7 3 3.7
  5. Protection of intellectual property 5 4.5 5 4.6
  6. Price controls 4 4.1 4 4.1
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 3 3.3 3 3.4
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 4 3.7 4 3.6
  9. Minority shareholders 4 4.2 4 4.2
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 4 4.2 3 3.5
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 3 3.8 3 3.8
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 5 4.8 5 4.9
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 5 4.6 5 4.6
  5. Government favouritism 4 3.9 3 3.3
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 5 4.8 5 4.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 4 4.4 4 4.1
  3. Ease of trading* 5 4.6 5 4.6
  4. Openness of trade* 5 4.3 4 4.3
  5. Restrictions on the current account 5 4.9 5 4.9
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 4 4.3 5 4.7
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 2 2.7 3 2.9
  3. Value-added tax* 3 2.4 3 2.3
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 3 2.8 3 2.8
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 4 3.6 4 3.9
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 4 3.8 4 3.8
  7. Tax complexity 3 3.4 3 3.4
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 2 2.9 2 3.3
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 4 4.5 5 4.6
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 4 4.0 5 4.2
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 4 3.4 4 4.0
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 4 4.3 4 4.4
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 3 3.4 4 3.7
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 2 2.4 2 2.4
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 5 4.5 5 4.6
  3. Quality of workforce* 4 3.9 4 4.0
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 4 4.3 4 4.4
  5. Health of the workforce* 5 4.9 5 4.9
  6. Level of technical skills 4 4.2 4 4.1
  7. Cost of living* 2 3.1 2 3.1
  8. Incidence of strikes* 5 3.7 5 3.8
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 4 3.2 4 3.4
 10. Extent of wage regulation 4 3.4 4 3.3
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 3 3.8 3 3.7
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 3 4.2 3 4.6
  2. Broadband connection speed* 5 4.5 4 4.6
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 5 4.3 5 4.4
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 5 4.6 5 4.6
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 4 3.8 4 3.8
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 4 4.2 4 4.3
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 5 4.4 5 4.6
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 5 4.2 5 4.4
  9. Rents of office space* 2 1.8 2 1.6
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 5 4.3 4 4.2
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 5 4.7 5 4.8
  3. Scope of e-government* 4 4.2 5 4.6
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 5 4.4 4 4.1
  5. Internet use* 5 4.4 5 4.9
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 3 2.3 3 2.5
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 5 4.3 5 4.6
  8. Research infrastructure* 5 4.4 5 4.3
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

Subject: Tax rates; Older workers; Councils; Exports; Migration; Foreign exchange rates; Labor force; Aging; Politics; Productivity; Consumption; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Population growth; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Research & development--R & D; Coronaviruses; Tourism; Households; Climate change; Labor market; Economic forecasts; Economic growth

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Older workers Exports Foreign exchange rates Labor force Productivity Consumption International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Labor market Economic forecasts Economic growth

Location: Austria; Western Europe

Company / organization: Name: Economist Intelligence Unit; NAICS: 516210

Identifier / keyword: Austria; Western Europe

Title: Country Forecast Austria September 2021

Publication title: Country Forecast. Austria; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kin gdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09668950

e-ISSN: 20489196

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611014241

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-austria-september-2021/docview/2611014241/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Venezuela September 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-september-2021/docview/2633622135/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Venezuela+September+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=13507133&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Report Venezuela September 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Venezuela; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507133

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2633622135

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-september-2021/docview/2633622135/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-02-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Lithuania 3rd Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-lithuania-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2633621804/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Lithuania&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Lithuania+3rd+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Lithuania&amp;rft.issn=14626721&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Lithuania; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Lithuania; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Lithuania 3rd Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Lithuania

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 14626721

e-ISSN: 20475209

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2633621804

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-lithuania-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2633621804/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-02-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Bosnia-Hercegovina 3rd Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-bosnia-hercegovina-3rd-quarter/docview/2633620971/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Bosnia+and+Hercegovina&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Bosnia-Hercegovina+3rd+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Bosnia+and+Hercegovina&amp;rft.issn=1462673X&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Bosnia-Hercegovina; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Bosnia-Hercegovina; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Bosnia-Hercegovina 3rd Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Bosnia and Hercegovina; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 1462673X

e-ISSN: 20474415

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2633620971

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-bosnia-hercegovina-3rd-quarter/docview/2633620971/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-02-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Venezuela September 2021 Updater

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-september-2021-updater/docview/2611016686/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Key indicators Key indicators 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Real GDP growth (%) -31.0 4.5 13.0 5.0 3.2 2.5 Consumer price inflation (av; %) 3,634 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3 Budget balance (% of GDP) -5.0 -7.2 -5.8 -5.7 -6.7 -7.1 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.7 0.6 2.3 2.2 1.1 1.0 Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 13.9 10.1 9.9 12.2 17.7 18.3 Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (av) 320,729.3 4,236,513.3 36,893,532 173,882,489 563,420,207 1,138,720,864 Exchange rate BsS:€1 (av) 366,042.5 5,058,747.5 43,165,433 199,530,157 662,018,743 1,383,545,849 Country forecast overview: Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 29.7 Population growth -0.4 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 50.4 Real GDP growth -24.6 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 122.3 Real domestic demand growth -25.2 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,696 Inflation 7,490.5 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,112 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.6 Exchange rate (av) BsS:US$ 320,729.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 0.8 a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. In January 2016 the politicised Supreme Court declared the legislature to be in contempt of court, blocking all subsequent legislation. The Economist Intelligence Unit estimates that the goods trade surplus fell to US$12.6bn in 2019, amid a long-term decline in oil exports.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Venezuela+September+2021+Updater&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-09-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=09669574&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - Despite Venezuela's socioeconomic collapse and the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela, to retain power throughout the 2021-25 forecast period. Mr Maduro's position will be supported primarily by his grip over a complex security apparatus and the opposition's lack of de facto power. On this basis, we expect continued deterioration of the economy, sustained outward migration, and a poorer and more violent Venezuela. Despite US sanctions (and their impact on oil production), the Maduro regime has managed internal dissent through a patronage system that rewards loyalty and through its strict control over the security forces.
- The scale of the socioeconomic collapse and the elevated level of political instability will ensure that the Maduro regime continues to be challenged both economically and politically. In particular, there is a non-negligible risk of regime change stemming from a possible breakdown in the patronage system that sustains the security forces' support of the regime. Under our baseline forecast, we assume that Mr Maduro will avoid this, as long as oil rents recover from this year onwards. However, there are some risks to this assumption stemming from the impact of US sanctions and weak of incentives for investment in the domestic oil industry.
- De facto dollarisation of the economy is expanding. Concurrently, the government has taken measures that have allowed the official exchange rate to float. These measures have aided price stability and therefore increased the availability of some basic goods. However, the measures are not a product of economic orthodoxy, but rather of policy decisions to ensure the regime's survival. We do not expect to see the comprehensive economic and institutional reforms that would be required to resolve Venezuela's economic crisis within the forecast period.

Country forecast overview: Key indicators Key indicators 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Real GDP growth (%) -31.0 4.5 13.0 5.0 3.2 2.5
Consumer price inflation (av; %) 3,634 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3
Budget balance (% of GDP) -5.0 -7.2 -5.8 -5.7 -6.7 -7.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.7 0.6 2.3 2.2 1.1 1.0
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 13.9 10.1 9.9 12.2 17.7 18.3
Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (av) 320,729.3 4,236,513.3 36,893,532 173,882,489 563,420,207 1,138,720,864
Exchange rate BsS:€1 (av) 366,042.5 5,058,747.5 43,165,433 199,530,157 662,018,743 1,383,545,849
Country forecast overview: Business environment rankings                
Value of index a     Global rank b     Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25   2016-20 2021-25   2016-20 2021-25
3.07 3.08   81 82   12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

- Venezuela ranks 82nd of 82 countries in the global business environment rankings for 2021-25, having been in 81st place in the 2016-20 historical period, despite minor improvements in some areas. Reforms to institutions, economic policy and the business environment are unlikely.

Country forecast overview: Venezuela's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2021-22: Enforcement of price controls remains lax, but risk of state intervention remains high. Corruption and selective application of regulations are common and continue to undermine free competition.
2023-25: Contract rights remain weak, and red tape and ad hoc interventionism continue.
Policy towards foreign investment 2021-22: Government efforts to revive foreign investment fail owing to US sanctions and political and economic instability.
2023-25: Investment flows remain low amid ongoing economic volatility. Intellectual property protection and private property rights deteriorate.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2021-22: Currency controls are weakened, but access to foreign currency remains limited. US sanctions hamper trade.
2023-25: Efforts to remove trade and capital controls are undertaken on a gradual basis, and de facto dollarisation advances. Domestic supply of foreign currency remains limited as oil prices decline.
Taxes 2021-22: Risks of further unrest and political instability reduce probability of central government increasing taxes. However, municipal authorities raise taxes owing to funding shortfalls.
2023-25: Tax system remains complex and unwieldy, but risk of discriminatory, ad hoc tax measures declines.
Financing 2021-22: Inflation remains high, and concerns surrounding economic instability restrict financing to only short term.
2023-25: Economic adjustments take time to feed through to solid, sustainable growth in credit to private sector and development of capital markets. Long-term finance remains in short supply.
Labour market 2021-22: Labour laws add substantially to non-wage costs. Firms prohibited from firing workers until end-2022. Ongoing emigration of skilled labour aggravates skills shortages.
2023-25: Labour market rigidities persist despite some increased flexibility in hiring and firing practices.
Infrastructure 2021-22: Underinvestment in water network and electricity grid leads to continued rationing and unpredictable blackouts.
2023-25: Investors remain highly cautious about committing to long-term capital projects. Infrastructure deteriorates even further.
Technological readiness 2021-22: E-government services remain almost non-existent. Telecommunications sector is opened to foreign investment, but with little interest. Local use of cryptocurrency expands among middle- and high-income households.
2023-25: Limited regulatory capacity and years of underinvestment continue to restrict internet and mobile coverage.
Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 29.7 Population growth -0.4
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 50.4 Real GDP growth -24.6
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 122.3 Real domestic demand growth -25.2
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,696 Inflation 7,490.5
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,112 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.6
Exchange rate (av) BsS:US$ 320,729.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 0.8
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Background: From 1958 until the mid-1990s, two parties-Acción Democrática and the Comité de Organización Política Electoral Independiente-alternated in power. Frequent economic crises and endemic corruption eventually led to a collapse in support for both parties and culminated in the 1998 election of Hugo Chávez, a former lieutenant-colonel and leader of a failed coup in 1992. Mr Chávez's policy programme exacerbated political polarisation, but several attempts to remove him from power before his death in March 2013 proved unsuccessful. His chosen successor, Nicolás Maduro, has seen his own popularity plummet, as his macroeconomic mismanagement-aggravated by wide-ranging US sanctions-has plunged the country into a state of economic collapse.
Political structure: Although Venezuela is nominally a federal republic with separation of powers, the ruling Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV) has systematically eroded institutions. In December 2015 the opposition coalition, Mesa de la Unidad Democrática, won control of the unicameral National Assembly. In January 2016 the politicised Supreme Court declared the legislature to be in contempt of court, blocking all subsequent legislation. In August 2017 a PSUV-only Constituent Assembly (ANC) granted itself control over all legislative matters, becoming the country's de facto legislature and sidelining the National Assembly. The ANC was dissolved at end-2020, after the PSUV and its allies regained control of the legislature in an election that was widely regarded as rigged.
Policy issues: The most pressing policy issue is the need to stabilise the crisis-ridden economy. The monetisation of vast public deficits has created an ever-increasing excess of domestic currency, triggering hyperinflation. Mismanagement of PDVSA (the state-owned oil company and originator of practically all foreign-currency inflows into the country) has resulted in a sharp contraction in oil production. Attempts to address these problems through distortionary price and currency controls proved actively counter-productive and led to major shortages of both foreign currency and basic goods. The scarcity of foreign exchange also led to arrears on most of the external debt issued by the sovereign and state-owned firms. The Maduro regime is now changing tack and pursuing incremental pro-market reforms, but its efforts are hindered by chronic economic instability, a lack of confidence in the legal framework and wide-ranging US sanctions.
Taxation: The top corporate tax rate is 34% for non-oil companies and 50% for oil firms. The value-added tax (VAT) rate stands at 12%.
Foreign trade: The Economist Intelligence Unit estimates that the goods trade surplus fell to US$12.6bn in 2019, amid a long-term decline in oil exports. We estimate that the trade account deteriorated further in 2020, shifting to a US$1.7bn deficit.
Major exports 2018 % of total Major imports 2013 % of total
Petroleum 88.7 Intermediate goods 56.5
Other 11.3 Capital goods 24.2
    Consumer goods 19.3
       
Leading markets 2019 % of total Leading suppliers 2019 % of total
India 27.0 China 30.6
UAE 19.6 US 18.4
Netherlands Antilles 6.4 Brazil 7.7
Aruba 1.9 India 6.3
Outlook for 2021-25: Political stability The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV, the Chavistas), to remain in power throughout the 2021-25 forecast period, despite its role in fomenting the country's ongoing socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis. A number of factors underpin our forecast; particularly significant is the regime's strict control over the military, the police and paramilitary forces. This control, which depends on a patronage structure that rewards high-ranking officials and a disciplinary system that severely punishes insubordination, will allow the regime to manage internal dissent.
Having consolidated power over the years, the Chavistas have unchecked authority over all branches of government. Political control is nominally disputed by Juan Guaidó, the leader of the Frente Amplio Venezuela Libre (FAVL) opposition alliance and self-declared interim president, but the opposition lacks de facto power. Mr Guaidó retains the backing of most Western powers, including the US, which he has used to co-ordinate a "maximum pressure" campaign against the Maduro regime. However, with these hardline tactics failing to deliver results-and in some cases proving counterproductive-domestic support for Mr Guaidó is waning.
It is against this backdrop that the Maduro regime and the opposition are heading into new talks aimed at overcoming the long-running political détente. The president's main goals during the negotiations are to obtain international recognition and secure sanctions relief. However, Mr Maduro will not acquiesce to any measure that would threaten his immediate grip on power in pursuit of these goals, especially as he has shown himself capable of surviving near-complete diplomatic and economic isolation. Therefore, any progress in political negotiations would require the opposition to set reasonable expectations regarding what can be achieved in the short run. The opposition could extract some meaningful, albeit minor, concessions from the regime in exchange for partial sanctions relief. In the immediate term this could involve the release of some political prisoners and the strengthening of electoral guarantees ahead of subnational elections in November, in exchange for additional humanitarian carve-outs to US sanctions. If such an agreement is successfully implemented, it could serve as the basis for further incremental accords. However, the balance of risks is tilted towards a continued stalemate. The asymmetry in incentives and bargaining power, as well as the high level of mistrust between the two sides, means that talks could fall apart relatively quickly.
There are risks to our assumption that Mr Maduro will remain in power over the medium term. For instance, we do not rule out the possibility of a negotiated transition if substantial progress is made in the ongoing political dialogue. An agreement on the reimposition of presidential term limits could potentially create a political opening at the end of Mr Maduro's current term in 2024. Another possibility is that Mr Maduro is deposed through an internal coup; a putsch attempt could potentially materialise in the event of an unexpected breakdown in the regime's patronage system (which is heavily reliant on revenue from PDVSA, the state-owned oil firm). At present, neither scenario is particularly likely.
Instead, the major political challenges facing the regime will be of its own making. As institutional corruption grew, the regime forged pacts with various armed groups, either out of political convenience or to tap new, illicit revenue streams. However, several of these agreements have since broken down, leading to violent turf wars across Venezuela. Although these criminal groups lack the resources to challenge the regime outright, they will undermine the enforcement of law and order in the country.
Outlook for 2021-25: Election watch After a legislative election in December 2020 that was widely regarded as neither free nor fair, next up on the electoral calendar are the regional and local elections (to elect governors, mayors and their legislative counterparts), which will take place on November 21st. The Maduro regime has taken a number of steps to provide more legitimacy to the upcoming polls, including appointing two opposition representatives to the five-member board of the electoral council (CNE), renewing voter rolls and inviting international observers-such as the EU and the UN-to oversee the elections. Despite these moves, we remain sceptical that the regime would allow truly competitive polls that could put its dominance at the subnational level at risk. The PSUV's control of both the CNE board and the judiciary are designed to guard against such an outcome.
Nonetheless, we think that there will be sufficient incentives for pragmatists within the opposition to participate in the November elections, which are set to be the most competitive since the legislative polls in 2015 (the last free and fair elections). The motivations for the opposition are twofold. First, the elections will allow it to obtain a modest amount of power at the local level (which is preferable to none). Second, it will give the opposition the opportunity to rebuild its ties to grassroots movements and its local organising capacity (which had been decimated by a strategy that relied almost entirely on international pressure against the Maduro regime).
Outlook for 2021-25: International relations Venezuela's main foreign policy challenge will be to facilitate a rapprochement with the US in a manner that is compatible with the survival of the Maduro regime. The administration led by the former US president, Donald Trump (2017-21), instituted several rounds of crippling oil sanctions as part of a systematic campaign designed to undermine the regime. Although the aggressive sanctions policy did not produce its intended outcome, it did accelerate the decline of Venezuela's oil industry. Mr Maduro will try to reset ties with the US under the current president, Joe Biden, but we expect little progress. US policy towards Venezuela has bipartisan support in the US, and Mr Biden is unlikely to provide significant sanctions relief unless the Maduro regime makes major political compromises and commits to democratic reform (both of which are highly improbable). Any changes to US sanctions policy will therefore be only on humanitarian grounds and aimed at improving the lives of the poorest Venezuelans, as evidenced by recent exemptions granted for coronavirus-related transactions and imports of liquefied petroleum gas.
Venezuela's ties with its allies will be defined by ideological and geopolitical alignment rather than mutual economic benefit. Russia and China have previously extended major financial support, but this has been scaled back in recent years following non-payment of liabilities by Venezuela. Despite ongoing diplomatic support from both of these countries, and preferential access to their state-developed coronavirus vaccines, neither will be willing to provide game-changing amounts of finance during 2021-25. Instead, Venezuela will increase its reliance on Iran, which has recently become a major backer of the regime. However, assistance from Iran will be limited to intermittent fuel shipments (to alleviate Venezuela's petrol shortages) and technical assistance (to help PDVSA repair its refinery complexes).
Outlook for 2021-25: Policy trends The Maduro regime's immediate policy priorities will be to contain the public health crisis caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, alleviate ongoing diesel shortages and reverse a long-running economic collapse. However, progress on each of these goals will be limited.
To combat Covid-19, the government is maintaining its "Fórmula 7+7 Plus" strategy, which involves alternating between a week of tighter restrictions and a week of more relaxed ones. However, this will not prevent fresh waves of the virus, increasing pressure on Venezuela's decrepit medical infrastructure. Meanwhile the country's vaccine rollout has faced major implementation challenges; as at mid-July only about 10% of the population had received at least one dose, according to the latest available data. We do not expect enough doses to be distributed to have a significant impact on local transmission until 2023.
In an effort to address severe diesel shortages, the government has sought to increase domestic output by restarting operations at important refineries. However, the government's fix is not a viable long-term solution, mainly because producing diesel requires light crude, which is in limited supply and cannot be easily produced locally. The government has sought to intermittently import diesel through intermediaries, but it lacks the hard currency to increase its imports on the scale required. Therefore, we believe that a long-term remedy will hinge on the Biden administration reinstating exemptions on crude-for-diesel swaps. We expect this to happen later this year, but risks to this assumption are high.
Reviving the economy after several years of depression will also be difficult, and progress will be modest. To its credit, the government has managed to circumnavigate risks stemming from a hefty bitumen tax recently imposed in China. The policy measure was expected to affect demand from independent Chinese refineries for Venezuelan Merey (which is typically rebranded as bitumen mix from Malaysia to bypass US sanctions). However, price discounts, support from the Chinese state to mitigate the impact of the bitumen tax, and the acquisition of new trade partners in Asia and the Middle East have all helped to sustain demand for Venezuelan crude. Notwithstanding these positive developments, PDVSA is unlikely to be able to boost its output substantially in the near term. Although oil production is on an upswing, at 550,000 barrels/day in July, it is considerably below its pre-depression level of 2.5m b/d in 2012.
In the medium term, the regime will seek to pave the way for recovery by boosting private investment (given that the public sector is completely overstretched). The regime has passed an anti-blockade law, which gives the executive branch the unchecked authority to sign new deals with private firms and countries confidentially (in order to skirt international sanctions), without going through public tender processes. Concurrently, the regime is working on a hydrocarbons reform that would incentivise increased private-sector participation in the oil industry. However, these efforts are unlikely to yield significant results; even assuming that the regime manages to sidestep financial sanctions, it will struggle to attract new investment, given the abysmal business environ-ment and lack of confidence in the rule of law.
Outlook for 2021-25: Fiscal policy The authorities have not published complete data on the fiscal accounts since 2011. However, we expect that a high level of inefficient current expenditure, combined with an extremely weak revenue intake, will keep the budget deficit wide and the public debt/GDP ratio above 300% throughout the forecast period. The sovereign's default on most of its interest and principal repayments will continue to prevent access to external finance, leaving the regime reliant on monetisation to fund its deficits. Even if the government reaches an agreement with some of its creditors (including China) to restructure debt liabilities in 2021-25, we still expect the public debt burden to remain huge, particularly as considerable off-balance-sheet debt financing-mainly PDVSA-issued debt and development funds-understate the true size of total public liabilities.
Outlook for 2021-25: Monetary policy Monetary policy will remain subservient to fiscal policy as the Banco Central de Venezuela (BCV, the central bank) continues to print money to meet the public sector's financing needs. However, in recent years the BCV has taken steps to control growth of monetary aggregates. For instance, it lifted the cash reserve ratio (CRR) from 21.5% in late 2018 to 93% in early 2020, although it has relaxed the CRR slightly since then, to 85% currently. Although they have failed to tame inflation, these measures have led to the complete destruction of private-sector credit, which stands at less than 1% of levels recorded four years ago. These factors have accelerated the trend towards wider use of the US dollar in the economy; about two-thirds of financial transactions now take place in dollars.
Outlook for 2021-25: Economic growth After an estimated contraction in real GDP of 31% in 2020 (and a cumulative contraction of 77% since 2013), we forecast modest growth of 4.5% in 2021. Real GDP is now strongly correlated with oil production and exports, prospects for which have improved modestly.
Having plummeted to an estimated 500,000 b/d in 2020-its lowest level in several decades-we expect oil output to increase modestly to about 530,000 b/d in 2021. There are only 25 active oil rigs in the country, virtually unchanged from last year and substantially below a peak of 95 in early 2012. Moreover, there are few incentives to bring new rigs online in the near term. At present Venezuela's average (after tax) break-even price is about US$49/barrel. However, US sanctions on the regime raise the risks involved in dealing with Venezuela, forcing the country to offer a hefty discount on its crude. Therefore, at current market prices (Venezuela's oil basket traded at US$54.5/b in July), there is only a modest profit to be made from new investment.
We expect real GDP growth to accelerate to 13% in 2022, assuming that oil prices remain supportive and that producers continue to adapt to post-sanctions export markets. Although this appears to be a sharp rebound, it largely reflects a low base of comparison and is not indicative of any substantive recovery in the real economy.
In the medium term we expect the recovery to stagnate. Serious operational problems, a limited pool of buyers of Venezuelan crude and the weak long-term fundamentals of the oil market will cause growth to taper off towards the end of our forecast period. The non-oil economy will make some modest gains, assuming that continued dollarisation engenders relative macroeconomic stability. However, weak fundamentals and a poor policy environment will keep market opportunities subdued. Consequently, we expect real GDP to remain below pre-pandemic levels even in 2025.
Outlook for 2021-25: Inflation A severely reduced domestic goods supply, constraints on import capacity and the monetisation of large public deficits will impede the disinflationary process in 2021-25. The regime has shown little inclination to take on the fiscal and macroeconomic reforms that would address the root causes of inflation. Despite this, an ongoing process of informal dollarisation will mean that the pass-through from exchange rate to inflation will diminish gradually, helping to ease price pressures over time.
Outlook for 2021-25: Exchange rates Venezuela is poised for its third currency redenomination since 2008. From October 1st the BCV will replace the bolívar soberano with the bolívar digital. The change will effectively take six zeros off the currency, as each bolívar digital will be worth 1m bolívar soberanos. Although the measure is ostensibly part of the BCV's pivot to digitisation, the authorities have confirmed that they will still continue to issue fiat money. In our view, the redenomination is largely cos-metic; although it will help to simplify bookkeeping for a while, it will not fundamentally engender confidence in the bolívar, and large-scale debt monetisation will continue to erode the value of the currency. Consequently, local adoption of the US dollar will continue apace.
Outlook for 2021-25: External sector Balance-of-payments pressures will remain severe in 2021-25, contributing to goods shortages and economic inequities. Foreign reserves stagnated at US$6.2bn in July-their lowest level in three decades. This steep decline, which has happened over several years, reflects poor policymaking and a lack of economic diversification in the country's external sector.
Under our baseline forecast, we expect reserves to rise modestly over the forecast period, reaching US$8.1bn by end-2025. This increase will be driven largely by trends on the current account, as Venezuela's access to foreign capital will remain extremely limited. We expect the current-account balance to shift from an estimated deficit of 4.7% of GDP in 2020 to a surplus of 0.6% of GDP in 2021. Thereafter it will remain in surplus, averaging 1.7% of GDP in 2022-25. Crucially, our forecasts assume that export earnings will recover from a nadir in 2020. We also expect workers' remittances from abroad to play a significant role in propping up the current-account balance.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
International assumptions
World GDP growth (%) 2.5 3.2 2.9 2.3 -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
US GDP growth (%) 1.7 2.3 3.0 2.2 -3.5 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.1
Latin America growth (%) -1.5 0.9 0.8 -0.5 -7.0 6.0 2.9 2.4 2.5 2.4
World trade growth (%) 2.1 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 8.9 5.7 4.8 4.3 4.1
US CPI (%) 1.3 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
EU27 CPI (%) 0.2 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.1 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8
Industrial raw materials export price (%) -2.2 20.2 2.2 -8.6 -3.2 34.6 -0.5 0.7 -10.2 0.8
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 44.0 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (%) 0.5 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6
US$:€ (av) 1.11 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.19 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
¥:€ (av) 120.4 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 130.3 130.1 128.6 132.8 135.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Expenditure on GDP (BsS bn at current market prices)
GDP 0.28 2.01 9,823.09 808,661.90 16,178,038.9 226,653,462 2,121,378,100 10,346,008,123 34,086,922,533 69,746,652,903
Private consumption 0.24 2.02 7,239.40 366,313.59 10,494,884.2 194,994,949 2,573,933,330 13,307,235,317 40,853,212,424 86,200,278,215
Government consumption 0.03 0.18 1,651.88 211,102.62 6,216,892.7 115,321,744 1,506,977,670 7,738,977,166 22,968,524,336 46,958,143,625
Gross fixed investment 0.04 0.33 1,586.23 88,386.38 1,775,777.8 34,792,690 549,140,002 3,172,958,228 9,857,313,919 20,645,712,958
Exports of goods & services 0.09 0.62 4,890.63 440,773 5,101,813 109,026,666 1,112,995,513 5,191,892,642 16,361,239,644 31,773,096,019
Imports of goods & services 0.08 0.73 5,353.52 281,188 7,099,055 224,663,071 3,605,186,564 19,024,357,386 55,893,160,879 115,768,763,824
Stockbuilding -0.04 -0.41 -191.53 -16,725 -312,273 -2,819,517 -16,481,852 -40,697,845 -60,206,912 -61,814,090
Domestic demand 0.27 2.12 10,285.98 649,077 18,175,281 342,289,866 4,613,569,151 24,178,472,867 73,618,843,768 153,742,320,709
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 261.9 139.1 97.6 59.7 50.4 53.5 57.5 59.5 60.5 61.3
Private consumption 224.7 139.8 71.9 27.1 32.7 46.0 69.8 76.5 72.5 75.7
Government consumption 24.3 12.5 16.4 15.6 19.4 27.2 40.8 44.5 40.8 41.2
Gross fixed investment 35.3 22.9 15.8 6.5 5.5 8.2 14.9 18.2 17.5 18.1
Exports of goods & services 84.1 42.7 48.6 32.6 15.9 25.7 30.2 29.9 29.0 27.9
Imports of goods & services 71.5 50.7 53.2 20.8 22.1 53.0 97.7 109.4 99.2 101.7
Stockbuilding -35.0 -28.1 -1.9 -1.2 -1.0 -0.7 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1 -0.1
Domestic demand 249.3 147.1 102.2 47.9 56.7 80.8 125.1 139.1 130.7 135.0
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 85.8 100.5 73.7 45.3 64.9 86.0 121.3 128.6 119.9 123.6
Government consumption 9.3 9.0 16.8 26.1 38.4 50.9 71.0 74.8 67.4 67.3
Gross fixed investment 13.5 16.5 16.1 10.9 11.0 15.4 25.9 30.7 28.9 29.6
Stockbuilding -13.4 -20.2 -1.9 -2.1 -1.9 -1.2 -0.8 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1
Exports of goods & services 32.1 30.7 49.8 54.5 31.5 48.1 52.5 50.2 48.0 45.6
Imports of goods & services 27.3 36.4 54.5 34.8 43.9 99.1 169.9 183.9 164.0 166.0
Memorandum items
Oil production ('000 b/d) 2,178 1,925 1,432 a 827 a 505 528 590 620 640 660
National savings ratio (%) -1.4 b 3.1 b 23.6 21.9 4.3 14.7 27.4 32.5 29.9 30.5
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Real expenditure on GDP (BsS m at constant 1997 market prices)
GDP 0.47 0.39 0.32 0.20 0.14 0.14 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.18
Private consumption 0.32 0.27 0.22 0.13 0.10 0.10 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.13
Government consumption 0.10 0.09 0.08 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06
Gross fixed investment 0.07 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02
Exports of goods & services 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04
Imports of goods & services 0.09 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.07 0.07
Stockbuilding 0.00 -0.02 -0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Domestic demand 0.49 0.38 0.31 0.20 0.16 0.16 0.18 0.19 0.20 0.21
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP -17.0 -15.7 -19.6 -37.3 -31.0 4.5 13.0 5.0 3.2 2.5
Private consumption -19.4 -16.2 -20.1 -38.0 -24.4 2.9 12.9 4.7 3.8 2.8
Government consumption -14.7 -7.2 -9.1 -26.8 -21.0 3.0 12.2 5.0 2.0 2.0
Fixed investment -45.1 -45.3 -37.5 -50.0 -30.0 8.5 35.0 17.0 5.0 2.0
Exports of goods & services -11.7 0.0 -10.8 -27.7 -27.4 4.8 12.4 5.6 3.4 3.2
Imports of goods & services -50.1 -34.7 0.3 -19.0 6.5 3.0 17.0 7.7 4.0 3.0
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -3.6 -2.4 1.9 1.3 1.0 0.8 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.0
Domestic demand -26.3 -21.1 -18.2 -35.7 -23.2 3.9 14.4 5.8 3.4 2.5
Real contribution to growth (%)
Private consumption -13.8 -11.2 -13.8 -26.1 -16.5 2.1 9.4 3.4 2.7 2.0
Government consumption -3.0 -1.5 -2.1 -6.9 -6.3 1.0 4.2 1.7 0.7 0.7
Gross fixed investment -10.5 -7.0 -3.8 -3.9 -1.9 0.5 2.3 1.3 0.4 0.2
External balance 13.9 6.4 -1.8 -1.7 -7.3 0.0 -3.2 -1.6 -0.7 -0.4
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Origin of GDP (BsS m at constant 1997 prices)
GDP at factor cost 0.47 0.39 0.32 0.20 0.14 0.14 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.18
Agriculture 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.01
Industry 0.15 0.11 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05
Services 0.31 0.27 0.23 0.14 0.09 0.10 0.11 0.11 0.12 0.12
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture -25.8 -16.5 -16.3 -35.0 -30.0 5.0 8.0 3.0 2.5 2.5
Industry 18.2 -23.2 -30.7 -28.0 -20.0 -4.0 12.0 5.0 2.0 1.0
Services -27.0 -12.1 -15.2 -40.5 -35.5 8.8 13.7 5.1 3.7 3.1
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 3.0 2.9 3.1 b 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.0
Industry 31.2 28.4 24.5 b 28.1 32.6 29.9 29.7 29.7 29.3 28.9
Services 65.9 68.7 72.4 b 68.7 64.2 66.8 67.2 67.3 67.7 68.1
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Growth and productivity
Labour productivity growth (% -17.4 -20.2 -22.9 4.6 6.2 1.4 2.7 -1.8 -1.7 0.5
Total factor productivity growth (%) -15.4 -16.9 -19.6 -8.3 -5.2 5.5 9.4 3.3 2.7 3.9
Growth of capital stock (%) -3.1 -4.8 -5.5 -6.2 -6.4 -6.3 -6.0 -5.8 -5.7 -5.6
Growth of potential GDP (%) -15.9 -15.0 -19.0 -27.7 -8.4 0.6 8.1 1.5 0.9 2.1
Growth of GDP (%) -17.0 c -15.7 c -19.6 c -37.3 -31.0 4.5 13.0 5.0 3.2 2.5
Growth of GDP per head (%) -18.1 -16.8 -20.6 -33.3 -31.0 7.3 13.9 5.8 4.0 3.3
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 30.8 b 31.2 b 31.6 29.7 29.7 29.0 28.8 28.5 28.3 28.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 261.9 139.1 97.6 59.7 50.4 53.5 57.5 59.5 60.5 61.3
GDP (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 2,072,100 9 92.3 56.3 48.1 52.5 56.4 58.3 59.3 60.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 8,500 b 4,457 b 3,086 2,008 1,696 1,846 1,999 2,085 2,136 2,178
GDP per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 67,238,775 275 2,918 1,893 1,616 1,810 1,960 2,044 2,094 2,157
Private consumption (US$ bn) 224.7 139.8 71.9 27.1 32.7 46.0 69.8 76.5 72.5 75.7
Private consumption (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 1,777,368 9 68.0 25.5 31.2 45.1 68.4 75.0 71.1 74.9
Private consumption per head (US$) 7,290 b 4,480 b 2,270 910 1,100 1,590 2,430 2,680 2,560 2,690
Private consumption per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 57,674,845 276 2,151 858 1,048 1,557 2,378 2,629 2,509 2,666
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 387.8 333.2 274.2 175.1 122.3 130.6 150.9 162.4 171.1 178.7
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 12,580 b 10,670 b 8,670 5,890 4,110 4,510 5,250 5,690 6,040 6,350
Personal disposable income (BsS bn) 0.27 b 2.24 b 8,192.57 444,483.68 11,630,626 202,107,429 2,573,209,272 13,006,704,683 39,065,055,868 81,354,438,622
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 249.6 b 155.3 b 81.4 32.8 36.3 47.7 69.7 74.8 69.3 71.4
Growth of real disposable income (%) -19.4 b -16.2 b -18.6 -33.6 -30.9 -3.8 8.9 2.4 1.5 1.4
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.42 b 0.42 b 0.42 0.39 0.39 0.37 0.37 0.36 0.36 0.36
Share of world GDP (%; market exchange rates) 0.35 0.17 0.11 0.07 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05
Share of world GDP (%; PPP) 0.34 0.28 0.21 0.13 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.18 0.20 0.18 a 0.10 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
NFPS expenditure 31.2 40.5 47.9 26.7 20.1 23.6 26.2 26.3 26.2 26.1
Interest 1.1 1.1 1.5 2.3 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.1
Non-interest expenditure 30.1 39.4 46.4 24.4 20.1 23.5 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0
NFPS revenue 20.4 17.5 16.9 16.7 15.1 16.4 20.4 20.6 19.5 19.0
NFPS balance -10.8 -23.0 -31.0 -10.0 -5.0 -7.2 -5.8 -5.7 -6.7 -7.1
Primary balance -9.7 -21.9 -29.5 -7.7 -5.0 -7.1 -5.6 -5.4 -6.5 -7.0
Government debt 22.9 36.1 180.8 232.8 302.0 317.0 329.0 336.0 343.0 355.0
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (av) 0.0011 0.0144 100.6865 13,537.2700 320,729.26 4,236,513 36,893,532 173,882,489 563,420,207 1,138,720,864
Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (year-end) 0.0022 0.0498 587.8727 44,482.6900 1,067,277.93 9,953,584 75,285,155 304,810,041 829,627,662 1,397,583,332
Parallel exchange rate BsS:US$ (av) 0.0000 0.0002 0.1065 14.3585 336.486 4321.24 37631.40 177360.14 574,688.61 1,150,108.07
Exchange rate BsS:€1 (av) 0.0012 0.0163 118.9601 15,156.3015 366,042.48 5,058,747 43,165,433 199,530,157 662,018,743 1,383,545,849
Exchange rate BsS:€1 (year-end) 0.0023 0.0598 673.1143 49,971.8539 1,309,656.75 11,745,229 87,330,780 350,531,547 991,405,057 1,719,027,499
Real effective exchange rate (av) CPI-based 740.6 2,321.8 3,290 4,299 6,811 9,107 11,963 12,234 10,874 10,726
Real effective exchange rate (av) PPI-based 49.9 41.1 58.4 76.5 121.2 168.1 222.8 228.3 202.7 199.9
Real effective exchange rate (av) ULC-based 69.8 58.0 6.2 2.2 2.6 3.5 5.1 5.4 4.9 4.9
Purchasing power parity BsS:US$1 (av) 0.00 c 0.01 c 35.82 4,618.16 132,240.54 1,735,128.55 14,061,078 63,702,139 199,229,493 390,385,141
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 150.0 c 1,170.0 c 63,281.9 c 4,945.6 c 1,286.8 c 990.5 852.4 381.7 227.2 104.9
Domestic credit growth (%) 28.5 596.6 118,213.2 2,161.8 1,646.7 1,288.1 1,206.8 403.7 229.1 105.7
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 20.8 c 21.1 c 22.3 c 28.7 c 13.9 c 10.1 9.9 12.2 17.7 18.3
Deposit interest rate (%; av) 15.1 c 14.7 c 14.6 c 30.6 c 52.9 c 39.2 23.6 17.2 14.7 13.3
Money market interest rate (%; av) 3.2 c 0.5 c 5.0 c 110.0 c 182.2 c 230.3 72.5 40.0 27.5 22.5
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 14.3 15.1 15.7 11.5 11.4 10.9 11.0 11.0 11.1 11.1
Labour force (% change) 0.9 5.5 3.9 -26.5 -1.5 -4.2 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.2
Employment (m) 13.3 14.0 14.6 8.8 5.7 5.9 6.5 6.9 7.3 7.4
Employment (% change) -2.0 -10.0 -20.0 -40.0 -35.0 3.0 10.0 7.0 5.0 2.0
Unemployment (m) 1.0 1.1 1.1 2.8 5.7 5.0 4.6 4.1 3.8 3.7
Unemployment rate (%) 7.3 7.2 6.9 24.0 49.8 46.1 41.4 37.5 34.5 33.4
Wage and price inflation (%)
Consumer prices (av) 254.9 982.8 1,005,130.7 17,365.2 3,634.1 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3
Consumer prices (year-end) 274.4 2,581.8 1,699,183.5 7,374.4 3,713.3 1,324.4 966.9 269.2 151.6 90.1
Producer prices (av) 240.9 1,026.0 1,005,130.7 17,365.2 3,634.1 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3
GDP deflator (av) 321.3 c 748.1 c 608,238.8 13,022.8 2,798.2 1,241.0 728.2 364.4 219.3 99.7
Private consumption deflator (av) 333.9 c 899.2 c 448,578.1 8,065.0 3,688.4 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3
Government consumption deflator (av) 292.7 c 646.3 c 1,005,125.2 17,358.4 3,627.8 1,700.9 1,064.7 389.1 191.0 100.4
Fixed investment deflator (av) 267.2 c 1,495.4 c 767,782.4 11,044.2 2,770.2 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3
Average nominal wages 250.0 816.7 58,631.0 5,000.0 2,800.0 1,755.0 1,210.0 410.0 202.0 109.0
Average real wages -1.4 -15.3 -94.2 -70.8 -22.3 2.7 12.0 3.3 2.1 1.8
Unit labour costs (BsS-based) 323.7 1,048.7 76,072.1 4,777.9 2,630.7 1,728.8 1,175.1 419.6 207.3 108.0
Unit labour costs (US$-based) -11.9 -14.7 -89.1 -63.7 15.3 38.4 46.4 10.2 -5.2 2.9
Labour costs per hour (BsS m) 0.00000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0007 0.02 0.4 5.1 25.8 77.8 162.7
Labour costs per hour (US$) 2.4 1.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2016 a 2017 b 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -3.9 9.5 a 9.2 a 7.8 -2.4 0.3 1.3 1.3 0.7 0.6
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -1.5 6.8 a 9.4 13.0 -4.7 0.6 2.3 2.2 1.1 1.0
Goods: exports fob 27.4 34.0 a 33.7 a 19.3 6.1 11.0 13.6 14.2 13.5 13.2
Goods: imports fob -16.3 -12.0 a -12.8 a -6.7 -7.9 -10.5 -12.3 -13.0 -12.6 -12.4
Trade balance 11.1 22.0 a 20.9 a 12.6 -1.7 0.5 1.2 1.2 0.9 0.8
Services: credit 1.3 1.1 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7
Services: debit -9.5 -6.7 -6.4 -5.4 -3.5 -3.6 -4.3 -4.9 -5.3 -5.5
Services balance -8.2 -5.6 a -5.7 a -5.0 -3.2 -3.3 -3.9 -4.4 -4.7 -4.8
Primary income: credit 0.6 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6
Primary income: debit -7.5 -8.2 -8.9 -4.0 -2.1 -2.4 -2.7 -2.9 -3.4 -3.6
Primary income balance -6.9 -7.6 a -8.0 a -3.6 -1.9 -2.2 -2.2 -2.3 -2.8 -3.0
Secondary income: credit 0.6 0.8 2.3 3.8 4.5 5.3 6.2 6.9 7.3 7.6
Secondary income: debit -0.5 -0.2 -0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Secondary income balance 0.2 0.6 a 2.0 a 3.8 4.5 5.3 6.2 6.8 7.3 7.6
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 90.0 b 45.7 58.2 54.0 36.3 56.1 58.5 54.8 51.6 48.0
Export prices (% change) -28.0 b -49.2 27.4 -7.3 -32.8 54.3 4.3 -6.2 -5.9 -6.9
Import price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 254.2 b 275.9 288.5 139.0 139.1 323.5 509.6 529.7 461.8 459.5
Import prices (% change) -37.0 b 8.5 4.6 -51.8 0.1 132.6 57.5 4.0 -12.8 -0.5
Terms of trade (2005=100) 35.4 b 16.6 20.2 38.9 26.1 17.3 11.5 10.3 11.2 10.5
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 2.2 b 7.5 6.0 -1.3 -7.9 11.1 6.1 6.1 5.2 3.6
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2016 a 2017 b 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment 1.6 -0.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.9
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 0.6 0.0 0.9 1.6 1.1 1.1 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.5
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 4.5 -0.3 5.6 14.3 9.6 7.0 5.4 4.9 5.4 5.1
Outward direct investment -1.0 -2.2 -0.7 -0.7 -0.5 -0.6 -0.6 -0.6 -0.7 -0.7
Net foreign direct investment 0.5 -2.3 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2
Stock of inward direct investment 30.2 30.1 31.0 31.9 32.5 33.0 33.8 34.7 35.7 36.6
Stock of inward direct investment per head (US$) 979.2 964.4 980.4 1,073.3 1,091.1 1,140.0 1,176.5 1,216.9 1,259.6 1,302.0
Stock of inward direct investment (% of GDP) 11.5 21.6 31.8 53.4 64.3 61.7 58.8 58.4 59.0 59.8
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.06 0.00 0.18 0.07 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.11 0.10 0.10 0.09 0.10 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.08
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2016 a 2017 b 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 163.9 164.6 a 167.8 a 168.1 a 161.7 168.4 175.8 181.2 181.7 183.0
Total external debt (% of GDP) 62.6 b 118.3 172.0 281.4 320.6 314.8 305.8 304.5 300.3 298.7
Total external debt (% of GDP, at parallel exchange rate) 0.0 1,919.2 a 181.9 a 298.4 a 336.3 321.1 311.9 310.6 306.3 301.7
Debt/exports ratio (%) 557.0 458.8 468.9 801.5 2,142.4 1,331.0 1,112.4 1,084.3 1,120.6 1,141.0
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 4.3 3.6 3.5 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.7 3.2 3.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data; The Economist Intelligence Unit is the source for all forecast data unless otherwise stated
Global data Oil prices: dated Brent
US and OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
US and OECD growth: OECD
US 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
US$ effective exchange rate: IMF, IFS; nominal weighted index
World trade growth: Economist Intelligence Unit aggregate
Domestic data Balance of payments, exchange and interest rates: IMF, IFS
Budget balance: non-financial public sector
Commercial banks' prime lending rate: average nominal interest rate charged on loans to agriculture
Deposit interest rate: average nominal interest rate on 90-day term deposits
Exchange rate: IMF, IFS; market rates expressed as BsS:US$
External debt; World Bank, International Debt Statistics
GDP: at constant 1997 prices, BCV
Inflation: BCV, consumer price index (1997=100) for the Caracas metropolitan area
Labour market statistics: derived from a series given in ILO, Yearbook of Labour Statistics
Oil production and export volumes: Bloomberg
Population: Centro Latinoamericano y Caribeño de Demografía (Celade, Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre)
Social indicators: World Bank, World Development Indicators
Stock of foreign investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report
Abbreviations BCV: Banco Central de Venezuela (the central bank)
IFS: International Financial Statistics
ILO: International Labour Organisation
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development

Subject: Tax rates; Local elections; Legislatures; Foreign exchange rates; Electricity distribution; Politics; Sanctions; Foreign investment; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Patronage; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Economists; Petroleum production; Tax reform; Wage & price controls; Labor market; COVID-19; Economic forecasts; Contempt of court; Economic crisis

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Foreign exchange rates Sanctions Foreign investment International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Economists Petroleum production Tax reform Wage & price controls Labor market Economic forecasts Economic crisis; Industry: 92112 :‎ Legislative Bodies

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Company / organization: Name: Economist Intelligence Unit; NAICS: 516210

Classification: 92112: Legislative Bodies

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Forecast Venezuela September 2021 Updater

Publication title: Country Forecast. Venezuela; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Sep 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Political Science, Business And Economics

ISSN: 09669574

e-ISSN: 20489773

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611016686

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-september-2021-updater/docview/2611016686/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Portugal 3rd Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-portugal-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2628236061/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Portugal&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Portugal+3rd+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-18&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Portugal&amp;rft.issn=02695456&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Portugal; Western Europe

Identifier / keyword: Portugal; Western Europe

Title: Country Report Portugal 3rd Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Portugal; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695456

e-ISSN: 20475659

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2628236061

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-portugal-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2628236061/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-02-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Italy August 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-italy-august-2021/docview/2611014437/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Economic outlook 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Real GDP growth (%) -8.9 6.0 4.4 2.0 1.8 1.2 Consumer price inflation (av, %) -0.1 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 Budget balance (% of GDP) -9.5 -11.5 -6.1 -4.5 -3.4 -3.0 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.7 3.8 3.5 3.4 3.1 2.9 3-month Treasury rate (av; %) -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 Exchange rate €:US$ (av) 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.8 Italy is the third-largest economy in the EU after Germany and France, and the eighth largest globally. Demographic outlook Population (m) 2015 2020 2025 Total 60.6 60.5 59.9 Male 29.4 29.4 29.2 Female 31.2 31.0 30.6 Period averages (%) 2016-20 2021-25 Population growth 0.0 -0.2 Working-age population growth -0.2 -0.5 Labour force growth -0.3 0.2 The population increased at an annual average rate of 0.4% in 1999-2016. Since 2017 the population has begun to decline, falling from 60.7m to 60.5m in 2020, according to the UN's population estimates. Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 60.5 Population growth 0.0 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 1,883 Real GDP growth -1.0 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,490 Real domestic demand growth -0.9 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 31,151 Inflation 0.6 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 41,181 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.9 Exchange rate (av) €:US$ 0.876 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.1 a Actual. From 1996 to 2011 Italy had a bipolar political system, dominated by a centre-right alliance and a centre-left coalition. Since 2011 the political landscape has become more fragmented, with the emergence of the anti-establishment Movimento 5 Stelle (M5S) and a recent splintering of the centre left.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Italy&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Italy+August+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-18&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Italy&amp;rft.issn=09668845&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - After a government crisis in early 2021, a national unity government led by the former head of the European Central Bank (ECB), Mario Draghi, was sworn in in mid-February. His cabinet comprises a mix of technocratic and political ministers and has gained the support in parliament of all of the main political parties, except the relatively small, but increasingly popular far-right Fratelli d'Italia (FdI). The Economist Intelligence Unit does not expect an early election ahead of the end of the parliamentary term in 2023. Opinion polls indicate that only the Lega and the FdI would benefit from an early vote. Mr Draghi's policy agenda is ambitious and focuses on major long-delayed reforms, including taxation, justice and public administration. These will be hard to implement given political and societal resistance to reforms and time constraints.

Italy--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.43 6.96 40 34 16 15
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

- Italy's business environment score improves moderately during the forecast period (2021-25), but the country rises by six places in the global ranking. The scores improve across a broad range of categories, resulting in large rises in Italy's global rankings for macroeconomic policy, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, and financing. This reflects the impact of a rebound in economic activity after the severe pandemic-driven recession in 2020, modest economic reforms taken by successive governments since late 2011 and expectations that Draghi's government will manage to implement at least some of the reforms contained in Italy's national recovery and resilience plan. The plan was approved by the European Commission on June 22nd 2021 and will allow the government to access the substantial financial support on offer from the EU during the forecast period.

Italy--highlights: Economic outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Real GDP growth (%) -8.9 6.0 4.4 2.0 1.8 1.2
Consumer price inflation (av, %) -0.1 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5
Budget balance (% of GDP) -9.5 -11.5 -6.1 -4.5 -3.4 -3.0
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.7 3.8 3.5 3.4 3.1 2.9
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5
Exchange rate €:US$ (av) 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.8

- Italy is the third-largest economy in the EU after Germany and France, and the eighth largest globally. The country has faced two decades of economic stagnation, with low productivity growth and labour force participation. GDP per head is below the euro zone average. Economic activity will rebound to 6% in 2021, after a sharp contraction in 2020. We expect real GDP to expand further, by 4.4%, in 2022 and for growth to average 1.7% in 2023-25, supported by the EU-funded Recovery and Resilience Facility, of which Italy will be the largest recipient in absolute terms. Italy's biggest macroeconomic policy challenges include reviving investment and economic growth, making policies more socially inclusive, and putting public debt on a sustainable downwards path.

Italy--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2015 2020 2025
Total 60.6 60.5 59.9
 Male 29.4 29.4 29.2
 Female 31.2 31.0 30.6
Period averages (%)   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth   0.0 -0.2
Working-age population growth   -0.2 -0.5
Labour force growth   -0.3 0.2

- The population increased at an annual average rate of 0.4% in 1999-2016. Since 2017 the population has begun to decline, falling from 60.7m to 60.5m in 2020, according to the UN's population estimates. We expect the population to continue falling slightly during the forecast period, to 59.9m in 2025, reflecting the natural decline of the Italian population and lower immigrant inflows.

Italy--highlights: Market opportunities   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,883 2,116 2,188 2,216 2,342 2,487
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 31,151 35,046 36,313 36,844 39,023 41,539
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 1,211 1,295 1,291 1,292 1,348 1,423
Household consumption (US$ bn) 1,092 1,200 1,247 1,255 1,317 1,396
Household consumption per head (US$) 18,070 19,880 20,700 20,860 21,950 23,320

- Italy is one of the largest and richest markets in Europe, with a population of about 6om. However, growth potential remains limited because the country is a mature consumer market with weak income and population growth prospects. Income levels differ greatly between the north and the south of Italy, with GDP per head in the south only about 46% of that in the north. Demographic trends will have an important impact on spending patterns, with population ageing driving healthcare expenditure.

Italy--highlights: Long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 2.0 0.7 1.2
Growth of real GDP 1.7 0.3 0.8
Labour productivity growth 1.6 1.4 1.5

- Our baseline forecast is that Italy's weak demographic profile will act as a substantial brake on real GDP growth, which we expect to average just 0.8% per year in 2021-50 (the long-term forecast period). A more favourable political environment could produce better economic growth performance in the long term, but the chance of improvements in Italy's institutional framework being implemented in the short to medium term is low.

Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 60.5 Population growth 0.0
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 1,883 Real GDP growth -1.0
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 2,490 Real domestic demand growth -0.9
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 31,151 Inflation 0.6
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 41,181 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.9
Exchange rate (av) €:US$ 0.876 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.1
a Actual.
Background: Post-war Italy has been characterised by a weak political structure and, since the 1970s, a declining economic base. From 1996 to 2011 Italy had a bipolar political system, dominated by a centre-right alliance and a centre-left coalition. Since 2011 the political landscape has become more fragmented, with the emergence of the anti-establishment Movimento 5 Stelle (M5S) and a recent splintering of the centre left. Following the 2018 election, M5S and the right wing Lega formed a government led by Giuseppe Conte, but it was unstable and undermined Italy's relations with the EU. In an agreement to avert a snap election in late 2019, M5S and the pro-European centre-left Partito Democratico (PD) formed a new government, also led by Mr Conte. After a government crisis in early 2021, Mario Draghi, an independent and former European Central Bank president, was appointed prime minister in February, receiving unusually broad support.
Political structure: Parliament, comprising two houses with equal powers, is elected for a five-year term. In the event of a political crisis, the president, who is elected by parliament for a seven-year term, decides whether to call an election or nominate a prime minister to try to form a government. The president also promulgates laws and may return a law to parliament for reconsideration, but has no veto. Executive power lies with cabinet, which is nominated by the prime minister and approved by parliament. The prime minister cannot dismiss ministers without forming a new government.
Policy issues: The near-term policy priorities will be finalising the rollout of the coronavirus vaccine and implementing Italy's national plan to unlock the EUR209bn EU recovery fund money in 2021-26. The government is focusing on long-delayed structural reforms such as taxation, justice, competition and public administration. Past attempts to reform Italy's inefficient civil justice system, complex bureaucracy and taxation systems have achieved only cosmetic results, owing to the widespread unpopularity of such measures.
Taxation: The top rate of personal income tax is 43%, and social security contributions are high, especially for employers. The corporation tax rate is 24%, reduced in 2017 from 27.5%, but additional regional and municipal taxes, including the regional business tax (IRAP), are levied to fund health services. The basic rate of IRAP is 3.9%. Income earned from most types of financial investment is taxed at 26%. The standard rate of value-added tax (VAT) is 22%.
Foreign trade: The value of exports of goods (fob) stood at US$470.6bn in 2020 and imports (fob) were worth US$393.3bn. In the same year, the current account recorded a surplus of US$69.7bn, or 3.7% of GDP.
Major exports 2020 % of total Major imports 2020 % of total
Machinery & transport equipment 33.5 Machinery & transport equipment 28.6
Chemicals & related products 15.6 Chemicals & related products 18.4
Food, drinks & tobacco 9.7 Food, drinks & tobacco 9.8
Mineral fuels, lubricants & related materials 2.2 Mineral fuels, lubricants & related materials 8.4
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
Germany 12.9 Germany 16.4
France 10.3 China 8.7
US 9.8 France 8.5
Switzerland 5.8 Netherlands 5.9
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance The March 2018 general election yielded a fragmented parliament. The centre-right coalition fell short of the roughly 40% of votes needed to win a majority under the most recent electoral law, the so-called Rosatellum 2, coming in at 37%. Within the coalition, the populist, anti-immigration Lega (17.4%) surpassed Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia (FI; 14%), which had previously been seen as the leading party on the right, and polled well ahead of the hard-right, post-fascist Fratelli d'Italia (FdI; 4.4%). The election also saw a surge in support for the populist, anti-establishment Movimento 5 Stelle (M5S), which won 32.7% of vote, making it by far the country's largest party. After three months of difficult coalition talks, M5S and the Lega agreed to form a coalition government under the leadership of a technocratic prime minister, Giuseppe Conte. The mainstream centre-left Partito Democratico (PD), under the leadership of Matteo Renzi, won just 18.9% of the vote, an all-time low, leading to Mr Renzi's resignation and the election of a new party leader, Nicola Zingaretti, in March 2019 (who was subsequently replaced by Enrico Letta in March 2021). The PD and its smaller coalition partners won a combined vote share of just 22.3%, and Liberi e Uguale (LeU)-a formation made up of primarily left-wing splinter parties that spun off from the PD in opposition to Mr Renzi's leadership-took 3.4% of the vote. In August 2019 the Lega, led by Matteo Salvini, withdrew from the coalition to try to engineer a snap general election in order to turn his surge in electoral support into seats in parliament, where the Lega is only the third-largest party, behind the M5S and the PD. To avert a snap election, the M5S and the PD, which used to be fierce political opponents, unexpectedly put aside their differences and agreed to form a new coalition government, still led by Mr Conte. The latest government crisis led to the formation of a national unity government led by the former head of the European Central Bank (ECB), Mario Draghi, in February 2021.
Political forces
(General election, March 2018, unless otherwise indicated)
  Senate Chamber of Deputies   European Parliament
  No. of seats No. of seats % of vote a % of vote b
Centre-right 137 265 37 -
 Lega 58 125 17.4 6.2
 Forza Italia (FI) 57 104 14 16.8
 Fratelli d'Italia 18 32 4.4 3.7
Others 4 4 1.3 -
Movimento 5 Stelle (M5S) 112 227 32.7 21.2
Centre-left 60 122 22.9 -
 Partito Democratico (PD) 53 112 18.8 40.8
 +Europa 1 3 2.6 -
 Others 6 7 1.5 -
Liberi e Uguali 4 14 3.4 -
Others 2 2 4 10.7
Total 315 630 100.0 100.0
a Share of national vote for the Chamber of Deputies. b May 25th 2014.
Sources: Ministry of the Interior; national press.
Political outlook: Political stability Italy's latest political crisis was resolved with the appointment as prime minister in mid-February of Mr Draghi, an independent and former ECB president. His cabinet, which comprises a mix of technocratic and political ministers, has gained the support in parliament of all of the main political parties, except the relatively small, but increasingly popular, far-right FdI. As well as M5S and the PD, which were the two main backers of Mr Draghi's predecessor, Mr Conte, the current administration also includes ministers from the right-wing Lega and its centre-right ally, FI.
The Economist Intelligence Unit does not expect an early election ahead of the end of the parliamentary term in 2023. The window for the triggering of a snap election is now virtually closed until March 2022. Under Article 88 of the Italian constitution, the president cannot dissolve parliament "in the last six months of his mandate", which ends in January 2022. Given that an election can only be held between 60 and 70 days after parliament is dissolved, it would not be possible to call new elections before March. Moreover, with support from all major political parties except the FdI, the Draghi government has one of the largest ever parliamentary majorities, with 200 out of 315 votes in the Senate (the upper house of parliament) and 535 out of 630 in the Chamber of Deputies (the lower house). The government could survive even without the support of the 62 senators and 130 deputies from the Lega (which might withdraw its backing later this year or in 2022). Additionally, there is little appetite in parliament for a snap election. All parties in the government (except for the Lega) have too much to lose; opinion polls indicate that only the Lega and the FdI would benefit from an early vote. Finally, at the next general election, the number of seats is to be reduced by one-third, and so many of the current members of parliament are unlikely to be re-elected.
There is speculation in the Italian media and in political circles that Mr Draghi might put himself forward for the presidency in January, when the current president, Sergio Mattarella, reaches the end of his seven-year term. Mr Draghi would need to secure the support of two-thirds of members of parliament to be appointed as president, which would leave his position as prime minister vacant. In that circumstance, were parliament unable to agree on a replacement prime minister, a snap election would be called. However, we attach only a low probability to this scenario. Mr Draghi is less than halfway through his reform agenda, and vacating his premiership early next year would not augur well for his legacy. Our view is that he will try to push his pending reforms, including taxation, through parliament before the end of his mandate in 2023.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness Italy is governed by weak, divided executives, generally comprising multiparty coalitions, in which small parties often wield disproportionate power over policy decisions. Under the bicameral parliamentary system, all bills have to be passed in the same form by both houses of parliament in order to be enacted, often resulting in delays and the dilution of measures. This is unlikely to change following the rejection in 2016 of the Renzi government's constitutional reform package, which sought to reduce drastically the legislative powers of the Senate and would have effectively made the parliament quasi-unicameral. There are plans to cut radically the number of members of parliament before the next election, but further much-needed institutional reform is unlikely.
Red tape and Italy's inefficient judicial system are likely to continue to pose problems for businesses. Modest measures introduced in recent years to increase public-sector accountability and efficiency should help to gradually speed up some bureaucratic procedures, although given entrenched resistance to change within the public administration, the implementation of the reforms approved in 2015 has been slow. In July 2020 the M5S-PD government approved a package of measures (the so-called "simplification decree") aimed at cutting red tape. Attempts by previous governments to reduce bureaucratic procedures have been largely unsuccessful, and Italy still has among the highest levels of red tape in Europe.
A reform of the judicial system should speed up court proceedings in 2021-25 Italy has one of slowest justice systems in EU; the average number of days to resolve a contractual dispute in Italy is more than double that in some other EU member states. A partial reform of the judicial system was undertaken in 2014-16. However, many of the problems facing Italy's judicial system have not been addressed, including a fee system for lawyers that acts as a disincentive to concluding cases swiftly, a lack of specialisation among judges and a highly fragmented court system. Perceived interference or pressure from government and politicians is also a major issue. In August 2021 parliament approved amendments to reform the justice system-one of the main reforms agreed with the EU to unlock EUR191.5bn in EU funds. The aim of the reform is to speed up court proceedings, reduce backlogs and implement stricter statutes of limitation for criminal prosecutions. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the reform to improve partially Italy's justice system over the 2021-25 forecast period (albeit from a low base).
Previous reforms to reduce corruption have had limited impact Corruption is still rife in business, judging by the number of corruption scandals revealed in recent years. A bill presented in March 2010 containing measures intended to combat corruption among public officials took almost three years to become law. Since then government action appears to have intensified. In June 2014 the powers of the anti-corruption authority were strengthened, and less than a year later parliament approved another anti-corruption law, including provisions eliminating the minimum threshold for the prosecution of accounting fraud and introducing harsher prison sentences for this offense, as well as for corruption of public officials, embezzlement and mafia association. The M5S-Lega government passed further anti-corruption legislation at end-2018, imposing harsher criminal penalties and public-office bans for graft, and from 2020 applying the statute of limitations only to first-instance trials so that fewer cases are dismissed owing to a lengthy appeals process. The Draghi government introduced new anti-corruption responsibility for the ministry of finance, which will be in charge of preventing fraud and monitoring conflicts of interest.
Criminal organisations will continue to pose problems for businesses and deter investment, despite the authorities' efforts to combat extortion and usury, and the arrests of several mafia bosses in recent years.
Political outlook: Election watch The next general election is scheduled for March 2023. The political landscape has changed dramatically since the March 2018 election. The FdI has more than tripled its support since 2018, to around 20.3% in early August, surpassing the Lega and becoming the most popular party in Italy. The Lega is only just trailing (with support at 20.2%), but its support has dropped by more than 17 percentage points in opinion polls since the M5S-Lega government collapsed in August 2019, mainly to the benefit of the FdI. Support for the PD has remained broadly stable, at 18-20%, but support for M5S has halved, from 33% to about 16%, according to the latest opinion polls.
If elections were held today, a Lega- or FdI-led right-wing coalition would secure a majority of seats in parliament. At present, 37% of seats are distributed through a first-past-the-post voting system and the remainder through a proportional system to all parties that exceed a threshold of 3% of the vote. The previous M5S-PD government put forward a draft bill to change this to a fully proportional system, raising the minimum threshold of votes to 5%. We expect this to be adopted by parliament before the 2023 election.
Political outlook: International relations The ratification of the European economic recovery fund by all EU member states clears the way for joint debt issuance (worth EUR750bn) to be channelled to countries with lower living standards and those hardest hit by the pandemic. The size of the fund is modest, but it will help to increase fiscal space in highly leveraged countries. Moreover, the fund is a landmark step for the bloc, as it establishes a precedent for the EU to issue debt to fund common needs. About EUR390bn is to be transferred in grants and the remainder through loans, with the first tranches starting to be disbursed in August. The remainder of the funds will be disbursed during 2021-26, but their release will depend on strict implementation of reforms and investment subject to close scrutiny by EU member states. As one of the hardest-hit countries, Italy is set to receive about EUR191.5bn from the EU recovery fund in 2021-26-the largest amount in nominal terms-including EUR68.9bn in fiscal transfers (worth about 3.8% of 2019 GDP).
The EU's transatlantic relations have improved since the inauguration of Joe Biden as US president, and we expect significant co-operation on several fronts, including climate change in the run-up to the UN Climate Change Conference (COP26) in November. Both sides have made moves to defuse trade tensions. The EU and the US have reached a five-year truce in the 17-year dispute over subsidies to a US aerospace firm, Boeing and its European rival, Airbus. Both sides have also agreed to seek to resolve a dispute over the steel and aluminium sectors. However, some US-EU tensions will endure, including on trade, on which it will be difficult to reach a comprehensive agreement. EU efforts to level the playing field with China in terms of trade and investment access will be slow to progress: the Comprehensive Agreement on Investment will not be passed by the European Parliament in 2021 and its prospects for ratification appear slim even in 2022.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
Overall position 6.43 6.96 40 34 16 15
Political environment 6.0 6.2 40 43 16 17
 Political stability 7.8 7.8 22 23 14 14
 Political effectiveness 4.5 4.9 50 50 17 17
Macroeconomic environment 6.6 6.9 54 34 14 10
Market opportunities 6.6 8.0 6 4 2 3
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 5.8 6.0 46 44 18 17
Policy towards foreign investment 6.9 6.4 39 46 16 17
Foreign trade & exchange controls 8.7 9.1 28 11 14 5
Taxes 4.3 5.5 79 72 18 18
Financing 6.6 7.8 33 20 14 9
The labour market 5.7 5.7 58 64 18 18
Infrastructure 6.5 7.0 31 33 15 15
Technological readiness 7.2 8.0 28 24 14 11
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Italy's business environment score improves moderately during the forecast period (2021-25), but the country rises by six places in the global ranking and one place in the western Europe regional ranking. The scores improve across a broad range of categories, resulting in large rises in Italy's global rankings for macroe-conomic policy, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, and financing. The improvement reflects the impact of an expected rebound in economic activity after the severe pandemic-driven recession in 2020, modest economic reforms taken by successive governments since late 2011 and expectations that the government of national unity, led by Mario Draghi, will manage to implement at least some of the reforms contained in Italy's national recovery and resilience plan (NRRP). The plan was approved by the European Commission on June 22nd 2021 and will allow the government to access the substantial financial support on offer from the EU during the forecast period. However, scores decline or remain unchanged for policy towards foreign investment and the labour market, resulting in falls in the global rankings for these categories.
Despite expectations of a moderate improvement, Italy continues to score poorly for government effectiveness. There are plans to cut radically the number of members of parliament before the next election, but further much-needed institutional reform is unlikely. Previous reforms to address the shortcomings of Italy's slow judicial system and reduce corruption have had limited impact, and it remains to be seen whether the Draghi government's actions in these two areas will fare any better. Italy's tax system also remains a hindrance to businesses and foreign investment, and evasion remains widespread, despite periodic efforts to improve compliance. Action to encourage bank mergers and support banks' efforts to reduce the level of non-performing loans (NPLs) on their balance sheets has made some progress, but the sector remains vulnerable.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Italy's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2021-22: Only limited progress on reforms to improve competition is likely under new administration led by Mario Draghi.
2023-25: Improvements in competition policy depend on stabilisation of the political environment.
Policy towards foreign investment 2021-22: Modest reductions in red tape. Government imposes penalties on foreign firms that collect state incentives and then relocate production to non-EU countries within five years of the incentivised investment.
2023-25: Organised crime, legal complexity and shortcomings in judicial system remain deterrents.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2021-22: Quotas and tariffs are in line with EU practice. EU focuses on EU-UK trade deal in Brexit negotiations, further bilateral free-trade agreements and responding to US tariffs.
2023-25: An EU-US agreement remains elusive. The risk of a euro area break-up, which could lead to capital controls, is low.
Taxes 2021-22: Automatic rise in value-added tax (VAT) rate is averted, but the government abandons plans to complete the adoption of a two-rate "flat tax", owing to the costs involved. Introduction of a "digital tax" on foreign multinational firms.
2023-25: Government seeks to implement a diluted corporate- and income-tax-reduction package.
Financing 2021-22: Bank mergers, recapitalisations and non-performing loan sales make further progress.
2023-25: Banking sector exposure to the Italian sovereign will persist. Mergers of smaller co-operative banks and possible foreign takeovers accelerate, as does the sale of securitised bad loans. Profitability and credit provision remain weak.
The labour market 2021-22: "Citizenship income" remains in place, but the dilution of pension reforms is partly reversed. Reversal of some aspects of 2014-15 labour market reforms in 2018 dampens employment growth.
2023-25: Decentralised private-sector productivity-related pay deals and changes to public-sector contracts face resistance.
Infrastructure 2021-22: Bureaucratic obstacles constrain government plans for higher investment spending.
2023-25: Infrastructure still lags that of other euro area countries, despite some new investment.
Technological readiness 2021-22: Further digitalisation of public services. A preponderance of smaller and family-run firms, as well as high levels of corporate debt, keep research and development (R&D) spending low.
2023-25: Gradually improving economic prospects (as well as Brexit) encourage more information and communications technology graduates to seek work in Italy. Slight improvement in R&D and company-level technology investment.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.6 6.9 54 34 14 10
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
We expect Italy's macroeconomic environment score to improve only slightly in the forecast period. However, because of score falls or smaller improvements in other countries, Italy's global and regional rankings improve sharply.
Low interest rates will mitigate financial risk arising from weak public finances Italy's biggest macroeconomic policy challenges include reviving investment and economic growth, making policies more socially inclusive, and putting public debt on a sustainable downwards path. The size of Italy's public debt and its record of weak government effectiveness will continue to be a cause for concern for the core euro zone creditor countries, as well as being a risk to the stability of the country's financial sector. However, we expect the monetary policy of the European Central Bank (ECB) to remain ultra-accommodative during the forecast period, helping to keep government borrowing costs low and mitigate the financial risks attached to Italy's weak public finances.
Despite some progress in recent years, economic reforms have generally been introduced with a lag relative to most other struggling euro zone economies, and implementation has remained an issue. Further measures to reverse more than a decade of stagnant productivity growth are planned under Italy's NRRP, but implementation is still likely to be an issue. Demand-side price pressures will remain subdued owing to low-albeit rising-global energy prices, labour market slack and modest wage growth, but weak price growth will also complicate debt reduction as a share of GDP..
Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
5.8 6.0 46 44 18 17
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Policy towards private enterprise and competition remains an area in which Italy scores poorly compared with its EU peers, reflecting weak implementation and enforcement of competition rules, and inadequate reforms to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the public administration and justice system. Generally, EU directives have been the main drivers of liberalisation in Italy, forcing successive governments (which, regardless of their political leaning, have not instinctively favoured competition) to open up markets in several sectors, notably telecommunications, energy and professional services. The expansion of low-cost airlines such as Ryanair and Easyjet into Italy has opened up the air passenger transport market. However, an agreement reached between the European Commission and the Italian government in July 2021 will allow a new company, Italia Trasporto Aereo (ITA), to be carved out of Italy's loss-making national carrier, the former state-owned Alitalia, after more than four years in administration. Low-cost carriers are likely to challenge the agreement over the use of EUR3bn of state funds to finance the new company. Under Italy's NRRP, the Draghi government has pledged to improve regulations in specific sectors and to remove barriers to competition, including a simplification of the public procurement framework and the prioritisation of competitive processes to award local public service contracts. As with past reform programmes, implementation is likely to be an issue without an overhaul of the public administration and judicial system. In 2010 the powers of the Italian Competition Authority (AGCM) were strengthened and its remit extended to cover the provision of public services, but political pressure has generally limited effectiveness. This is also true of other watchdogs, including the Commissione Nazionale per le Società e la Borsa (Consob), the public authority responsible for regulating the Italian securities market, and the telecoms watchdog, Autorità per le Garanzie nelle Comunicazioni (AGCOM).

- Simplifying administrative procedures, which has been on the reform agenda of successive governments, is a crucial element of all the main pillars of the NRRP: digitalisation and innovation, ecological transition and social inclusion. It remains to be seen whether these measures will have a noticeable impact. Past reforms aimed at cutting red tape and improving the efficiency of the public administration to boost the economy have had limited success. This was owing to obstacles to implementation and the inadequate capacity of the public administration at national and local levels.

External constraints will continue to be the main drivers of liberalisation
- An EU directive aimed at empowering the competition authorities of member states to be more effective enforcers of competition rules and ensure the proper functioning of the internal market took effect in Italy at the end of 2020. It required several amendments to the AGCM's current legal framework and is expected to strengthen the Authority's independence from political interference.
- Weak contract enforcement, few convictions for white-collar crime and notoriously long court case backlogs will remain a deterrent of foreign direct investment (FDI) and domestic business investment. Improvements introduced in 2014-17 include extended prison sentences for some white-collar crimes such as bribery, the establishment of support offices to reduce the backlog in Italy's Supreme Court and an extension of the statute of limitations for serious crimes. The Draghi government has proposed further changes to both the criminal and civil justice systems designed to improve efficiency and speed up court cases. However, political opposition and resistance to change remain strong in the judicial system, which is likely to hamper implementation.

Further privatisation of major state-controlled companies is unlikely
- The privatisation plan that was re-launched in mid-2015 to highlight Italy's openness to foreign investment and reduce the level of public debt made little progress before the 2018 general election, and governments since then have shown no appetite for the sale of remaining stakes in state assets. This means that the planned public offering of a 30% stake in the national post office and financial services group, Poste Italiane, and the mooted sale of a 40% stake in Ferrovie dello Stato, Italy's state-owned railway utility group, are unlikely to happen.
- The Cassa Depositi e Prestiti Spa (CDP)-the state-owned development bank-already has sizeable stakes in state-controlled firms, such as the energy conglomerates, Eni and Enel; Italy's electricity transmission company, Terna; the shipbuilder Fincantieri; and Poste Italiane. We expect the CDP's role in the economy to expand further as it provides support for businesses struggling in the recession triggered by the coronavirus pandemic.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.9 6.4 39 46 16 17
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
The positive impact of economic reforms will only be felt incrementally FDI inflows into Italy have generally been low compared with other similarly sized countries, including those such as France that have traditionally been seen as no more open than Italy. The main deterrents to FDI in Italy relate to its bureaucratic and legal complexities, barriers to entry in areas of the services sector, inadequate infrastructure, high levels of taxation and energy costs, and labour market rigidities. Under past governments, labour market reforms, modest business tax cuts and the streamlining of Italy's complex tax system have begun to address some of these issues. However, given the Italian economy's long-standing structural deficiencies and the likelihood that the impact of recent reforms will be felt only incrementally, inward FDI in Italy will continue to lag that in other large EU countries. In 2019 Italy controversially became the first G7 country to sign a memorandum of understanding to participate in the Belt and Road Initiative-China's flagship global infrastructure integration plan. Chinese investors signed 29 separate deals for projects worth a total of EUR2.5bn, including investment in several major Italian ports such as Trieste and Genoa. Fears that Chinese firms could take control of strategic sectors are so far unfounded. Hardening sentiment at the EU level towards foreign takeovers and non-EU inward FDI-with a particular focus on inflows from China-has resulted in tighter regional screening provisions since 2017. The economic fallout from the pandemic is likely to spur greater scrutiny at the EU level, with Italy having extended domestic restrictions on acquisitions to cover banks, insurers, healthcare and energy.

- Judicial reforms should gradually improve contract enforcement, with signs that those introduced in 2014-17 have begun to reduce civil case backlogs. Although less ambitious than hoped for, anti-corruption legislation introduced since 2013 represents a further sign of intent to improve the operating environ-ment for domestic and overseas investors. Legislation passed in 2015 and banks' progress in recent years in reducing NPLs should encourage further financial sector consolidation, which could eventually attract FDI into the banking sector, although progress is likely to be slow owing to political resistance.

Foreign takeovers, especially of luxury goods brands, are likely to continue
- The 2011-14 economic downturn hit corporate balance sheets and Italian firms' ability to raise capital. As a result, foreign companies acquired or merged with a rising number of internationally renowned Italian corporate brands, particularly in the luxury and consumer goods sectors, such as Bulgari, Valentino, Loro Piana and Luxottica. The coronavirus-induced recession has weighed heavily on firms' balance sheets and equity valuations, so there is likely to be renewed foreign interest in acquisitions of Italian companies.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.7 9.1 28 11 14 5
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Italy's score in this category improves slightly in the forecast period, leading to large improvements in its global and regional ranking, owing to deteriorations or stagnation elsewhere. Italy's foreign trade regime is largely defined by its EU membership. Freedom of movement of goods, services, capital and persons exists within the bloc and we do not expect any exchange controls. There is a risk of further temporary border closures and travel restrictions within the Schengen area in the case of further waves of coronavirus infections across Europe, but the ongoing vaccination rollout will decrease this risk over time. Industrial supply chains staged a fairly rapid bounce-back from the initial pandemic-driven disruption in the first half of 2020. No tariffs or quotas are permitted within the EU, most non-tariff restrictions have been abolished and administrative costs related to cross-border trade are low. Bilateral trade disputes between EU countries are resolved by the European Commission or, in extreme cases, the European Court of Justice (ECJ), the jurisprudence of which has played a major role in developing the single market. Compliance with judicial or other rulings within the EU is higher than in other regional trading blocs or the World Trade Organisation (WTO). Trade with Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Switzerland is unrestricted under the European Free-Trade Association (EFTA). The EU also has a customs union with Turkey and a range of bilateral agreements with Switzerland. All of these arrangements exclude agriculture. Trade with other non-EU countries is mostly subject to moderate customs duties, with bilateral and regional agreements providing for lower or zero tariffs, as well as co-operation on non-tariff barriers.
The EU will focus on bilateral trade deals
- Amid a fraying multilateral trade system and opposition in many countries (notably the US) to further trade liberalisation, the EU's focus will remain on bilateral trade deals. In recent years the EU has finalised free-trade agreements (FTAs) with Singapore, Vietnam and Japan, upgraded its FTA with Mexico and launched trade talks with Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand. A provisional association agreement was reached in 2019 between the EU and Mercosur (the South American trading bloc) to create the world's largest free-trade market of almost 800m people, after 20 years of talks. However, there are doubts as to whether the agreement will be finalised and implemented from 2021 owing to the EU's new trade strategy, which aims to improve environmental standards and labour rights, as well as the bloc's commitment to reset relations with the US and its concerns over the deforestation of the Amazon.

Post-pandemic international trade will remain vulnerable to supply bottlenecks
- With the administration of Joe Biden, the new US president, expected to take a multilateral approach, fresh opportunities might arise for the EU, including the possibility of reviving negotiations on a transatlantic FTA. We expect the bloc to continue to make gradual progress, but it will face a weak and volatile global trading environment over the forecast period. Although global trade has staged an impressive recovery from the initial pandemic shock, it remains vulnerable to supply bottlenecks and uneven vaccination rates across the world. Moreover, many existing geopolitical trends, such as increasing US-China frictions, a rise in nationalist anti-globalist policies and the shift in the economic balance of power from West to East will persist. An increased recognition of the risks of supply-chain overreliance on a single market (such as China or the US) exposed by the pandemic is likely to encourage trade diversification over the medium term.
- The UK-EU trade deal reached in December 2020 ensures the UK's access to the EU's single market without tariffs and quotas. Although the worst no-deal scenario was avoided, the new status quo makes trade slower and more costly, thus putting a further dampener on the near-term trade outlook in Europe. The UK is Italy's fifth-largest market for goods exports, with the agri-food, mechanical machinery, clothing and footwear, and automotive sectors among the most exposed to more restrictive trading arrangements. Brexit is also likely to have a negative impact on Italy's important tourism sector, but Italy's exposure to the UK market is much smaller than that of most other Mediterranean EU countries.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
4.3 5.5 79 72 18 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Italy's tax system remains highly complex, so compliance is costly Italy's score for taxation improves in the forecast period, but the country ranks tenth from last in our global ranking and bottom in our regional ranking in 2021-25. Notwithstanding some streamlining under previous governments, the tax system remains complex, making compliance costly and time consuming for private-sector companies. Also, despite some modest tax cuts since 2014 and measures such as tax payment deferrals during the coronavirus crisis, the tax burden will remain high and is unlikely to decline much owing to Italy's high public debt and EU sovereign debt reduction requirements.

- According to Istat (the national statistics office), total tax revenue/GDP (including social security contributions) stood at 43.1% in 2020. This was 0.7 percentage points higher than in 2019 and above the euro zone average of 41.5% in 2019 (latest available data). According to Eurostat data, Italy has the highest implicit tax rate on labour in the EU (aggregate tax revenue from labour as a percentage of the potential tax base), at 43.8% in 2019 (latest available data). This was down from a high of 45.5% in 2013, but 5.3 percentage points above the euro zone average. At 16.2% in 2019, Italy's implicit tax rate on consumption was one of the lowest in the EU, highlighting that there is scope to shift taxation towards consumption and away from labour.

Despite promises to reduce labour taxes, they will remain high
- Despite a cut of 3.5 percentage points in 2017, Italy's standard rate of corporate tax is relatively high, at 24%. In addition, businesses also pay a regional business tax (IRAP), which is levied at a standard rate of 3.9% (and slightly higher than this for most financial institutions). Regions and municipalities also apply personal income surtaxes at varying rates to offset the impact of cuts in transfers from the central government, which have been an almost constant feature of budget adjustments in recent years. Company social security contribution rates are also high by international comparison, at 30% (9.5% for employees). These are unlikely to be reduced significantly unless pension spending, which amounts to about 15% of GDP (one of the highest rates in Europe), is significantly reduced. Currently the marginal personal income tax rate is 43% on gross annual incomes of more than EUR75,000.
- Some progress has been made in reducing tax evasion and avoidance in Italy since the 2013 crisis, but it remains widespread, encouraged in the past by frequent tax amnesties, the limited number and scope of inspections, and weak political will to close loopholes in tax laws. Governments have sought to encourage the use of electronic payments rather than cash, but their approach has been inconsistent, with stipulated limits on maximum cash payments undergoing frequent changes (the current limit is EUR2,000). The Draghi government's NRRP pledges to improve the tax administration and reduce evasion, but implementing such reforms will be challenging.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.6 7.8 33 20 14 9
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Fragmentation of the banking sector will be reduced only gradually Italy's score and rankings improve in the forecast period, reflecting the impact of a range of measures adopted by recent governments to encourage consolidation in the banking sector, support recapitalisation and tackle the issue of high NPLs. The sector's main shortcomings are fragmentation, with few large banks and many small and medium-sized lenders; high operating costs, because of excessive branch networks and personnel costs; low profitability; and heavy exposure to the sovereign, which leaves it vulnerable when concerns about government-debt sustainability increase. NPLs have declined considerably in recent years, but are still high, at 4.4% of total credit as at end-2020. This is well down from a peak of 16.9% in 2015, but more than double the EU average of about 2%. Much of the decline has been the result of large NPL securitisation operations by a few major Italian banks. Italy's smaller banks have made slower progress. With a view to supporting these banks' efforts to reduce NPLs on their balance sheets, the government has extended until July 2022 a system of guarantees (Garanzia sulle cartolarizzazioni delle sofferenze, or GACS) that was first introduced in 2016, with the latest extension approved by the European Commission in mid-June 2021.

- Progress towards consolidation in the sector has been slow, but the successful takeover in 2020 of UBI Banca, Italy's sixth-largest bank, by Intesa Sanpaolo, Italy's second largest, suggests that a new wave of bank mergers and acquisitions is likely during the forecast period. However, government efforts to encourage one of Italy's main banks to take over its stake in Monte Paschi di Siena (MPS) have been unsuccessful so far. The state rescued MPS, Italy's fifth-largest bank at the time, when it came close to collapse in late 2016. The stress tests carried out by the European Banking Authority (EBA) on Italy's four major banks (Intesa Sanpaolo, UniCredit, Banco Bpm and UBI Banca) in 2018 highlighted the improved health of Italy's banks compared with the EBA's stress tests in 2016. The results of the next round of EU-wide stress tests are expected in late 2021.
- The resilience of the financial sector will be severely tested by the fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. An array of policy support by the ECB, as well as domestic stimulus measures by the government and the Bank of Italy (the central bank) have helped to bolster liquidity and hold down banks' funding costs. However, an increase in loan losses amid higher unemployment and business failures, a continuing squeeze on profitability from record-low interest rates and bouts of global financial market volatility will put pressure on lenders' balance sheets, potentially exposing areas of weakness and curbing lending as the economy recovers. Italy's large number of small and medium-sized firms will continue to rely largely on bank borrowing for financing.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
5.7 5.7 58 64 18 18
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Past reforms will reduce long-standing rigidities only gradually Italy's global ranking deteriorates by six places in the forecast period, as we expect Italy to continue to perform poorly in the labour market category, especially compared with its EU peers. The Jobs Act legislative package that was passed in 2014-15 was a welcome development, but because the main reforms only applied to new private-sector hires, it will only reduce long-standing rigidities gradually. Having promised to dismantle the Jobs Act, the Movimento 5 Stelle (M5S)-Lega government made limited changes to it in its so-called Dignity Decree. Restrictions on the use of easily terminated fixed-term contracts were tightened, allowing them to be used for up to 24 months, compared with 36 months under the Jobs Act. It also required firms to provide justification for the use of such contracts, which is likely to have increased litigation, and pay an additional levy of 1.9% (up from 1.4%) when they extended a fixed-term contract. However, the cap of 20% of the workforce on temporary contracts for an individual firm remained unchanged. The decree also raised the minimum compensation for unfair dismissal from four months' salary to six months' and from a maximum of 24 months' salary to 36. Other measures introduced under the Jobs Act that remain intact include reduced employment protection for long-term contracts and a much simplified contract system for labour market entrants by introducing a standard open-ended employment contract with gradually increasing protection. The Jobs Act also increased the availability of unemployment benefits and streamlined the use of wage guarantee funds for temporary lay-offs or firm restructuring. The new national agency envisaged under the Jobs Act to co-ordinate the activities of all employment services providers became operative in 2018. Labour market reform is a major component of Italy's NRRP. However, rather than focus on contracts, as past reforms have largely done, it will seek to improve job activation schemes, as well as the retraining and up-skilling of workers, increasing the effectiveness of the national employment agency and improving education outcomes.
NRRP reforms will focus on job activation, training and employment agency effectiveness
- The shortcomings that persist in the Italian labour market left it particularly vulnerable to severe economic and social disruption caused by the coronavirus pandemic. Given the scale of the damage to the economy and the time-limited nature of state-backed schemes to protect jobs, the level of unemployment will rise sharply as support is withdrawn. The effects are likely to show significant variations across different sectors of the economy, with tourism, travel and hospitality among the worst hit. Low-skilled, low-paid temporary contract workers, women and young people are likely to be the worst affected.
- In view of a protracted recession, delayed reforms and a weak economic recovery in 2014-19, Italy's headline jobless rate was relatively high even before the coronavirus pandemic hit. At 10% in 2019, the unemployment rate was well above the euro area average of 7.6%. Youth unemployment remains particularly high, despite increased emigration of young people, especially graduates. At 31.7% in May 2021, the youth unemployment rate is the third highest in the euro area, where the average rate is 17.5%. Italian labour market participation also remains low, particularly among women and young people, and has fallen sharply during the pandemic. According to Eurostat, Italy's employment rate was 56.6% in the first quarter of 2021, down from a pre-pandemic average of 59% in 2019 and well below the euro area average of 66.3%. The female employment rate averaged 47.3% in the first quarter of 2021 (61.6% in the euro area).
- The M5S's flagship citizenship income scheme, which aims to reduce poverty, was established in 2019. However, concerns persist that it acts as a disincentive for people out of work to search for employment, resulting in higher structural unemployment. Pledges from various political parties in recent years to introduce a minimum wage in Italy have failed to become legislation. As a result, we expect wages to continue to be determined by sectoral wage bargaining between unions and employers' associations at a national level. The social partners agreed in 2018 to implement second-level plant or regional agreements linking wage increases to company performance and productivity gains, but the pandemic is likely to have halted progress in this area.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.5 7.0 31 33 15 15
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Infrastructure quality in the south will continue to lag the rest of the country As reflected in Italy's relatively low score in this category and its decline in the global rankings, the quality of Italy's infrastructure is set to remain below the average of other developed countries during the forecast period. A disparity between the north and the south of the country will also continue. Budgetary constraints have limited public investment in the past 25-30 years, while corruption investigations and opposition from local interest groups have been a relatively common reason for blocking or delaying several major projects. Italy continues to lag most other developed countries in the transport and energy sectors, and the rollout of high-speed broadband services has been slow. As illustrated by the collapse of the Morandi motorway bridge in Genoa in 2018, maintenance of existing infrastructure also remains an issue. However, the reconstruction of the bridge in record time (it reopened in July 2020) highlights that when there is political will to overcome bureaucratic obstacles there is ample scope for improvement in Italy's performance.

- Successive governments have promised to revive public capital spending by curbing current spending, freeing up funds earmarked for infrastructure projects and removing administrative obstacles that have held up investments. However, Italy's high debt servicing costs, combined with competing demands within coalition governments, have made a radical change in policy direction difficult. Backed by EU recovery funds, the Draghi government's NRRP is focused on a wide range of infrastructure investments in areas such as sustainable energy and transport, as well as in the digital economy, including the deploy-ment of ultra-fast broadband, and fifth-generation (5G) and satellite technology. It remains to be seen how effective implementation and monitoring of the investments will be.

Implementing major investments in the NRRP will be challenging
- Limited domestic energy sources and popular opposition to the development of nuclear-power generation will continue to cause uncertainty about security and diversification of supply. Poor infrastructure in energy distribution will keep upward pressure on costs in the medium term. Investment projects in the sector are also likely to continue to face strong local resistance.
- Building a high-speed broadband network across the country has been a policy priority of successive Italian governments. Progress has been extremely slow so far, but the Draghi government's focus on the need to accelerate Italy's digital transition may provide some much-needed momentum. Central to the government's plan has been Open Fiber, a wholesale broadband operator that is jointly owned by Enel and CDP. The Draghi government appears to have abandoned a previous plan to merge the network assets of Open Fiber and Telecom Italia to accelerate the rollout of the network and avoid unnecessary duplication, but the talks between the two companies have been fractious, and there is concern that a merger would have stifled competition.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.2 8.0 28 24 14 11
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.
Italy's technological readiness score and rankings improve in the forecast period, partly driven by measures contained in the NRRP. During the pandemic, growth in e-commerce accelerated (up by 34.8% year on year in value terms in 2020 and by 37.9% in the first quarter of 2021, according to Istat). However, it has been from a low base, with online purchases accounting for less than 10% of retail sales (compared with about 20% in the UK).

- Mobile-phone penetration is one of the highest in Europe, and take-up of new technologies such as smartphones and high-speed mobile contracts has usually been impressive. Spending on innovation, and research and development (R&D) is low for a developed economy, largely reflecting a preponderance of smaller and family-run firms, high levels of corporate debt, and limited public financial support. Total R&D spending was the equivalent of 1.4% of GDP in 2019 (compared with an OECD average of 2.5%), according to the OECD.

Digitalisation of public services is a policy priority
- We expect a slight improvement in R&D and firm-level technology investment, partly supported by the tax credit for R&D investment in effect since mid-2015, but growth will be from a low base. According to the European Patent Office, the number of patent applications in Europe originating in Italy rose by 2.9% in 2020-compared with an annual average decline of 0.7% in Europe as a whole-but only accounted for about 2.6% of the total. Relative to population size, patent applications in Italy were low, at 74 per million population, ranking Italy 20th-well behind other major European economies such as Germany, France and the UK.

Economic forecast: Policy trends Despite progress on the vaccine rollout, new coronavirus infections in Italy began to surge again in July, driven by the more transmissible Delta variant, which is spreading across Europe. The seven-day average of new daily coronavirus cases per million people stood at 103 on August 17th, up from ten in late June-although this compares well with countries such as the UK, France and Spain, where cases exceeded 500, 300 and 200 per million respectively. Coronavirus cases, hospitalisations and deaths had previously been declining since mid-March, allowing the government gradually to ease restrictions since April, with most of the measures lifted across the country by end-June. In early August, in response to the spike in infections, the government introduced mandatory vaccine passports for access to restaurants and other public places and to boost vaccine take-up. Following a slow start, the vaccination campaign has accelerated since April. As at August 17th about 57% of the population had been fully vaccinated, slightly above the EU average.
In mid-July the Council of the European Union approved Italy's national recovery and resilience plan. This details policy measures and delivery mechanisms that could release up to EUR205bn in EU grants and loans in 2021-26 (funds from the EU's Recovery and Resilience Facility account for EUR191.5bn). On August 13th the government received pre-financing equivalent to 13% of the total (around EUR25bn). The main pillars of the plan aim to accelerate digitalisation of the public administration and the broader economy, boost investment in the environment, reduce gender and income inequality, and strengthen health services.
The reform agenda of Mario Draghi, the prime minister, is ambitious, but hard to implement. The main focus is on three long-delayed structural reforms: justice, taxation and public administration. Past attempts at reform have achieved only cosmetic results, owing to the general unpopularity of such measures.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Government expenditure 57.3 58.5 52.5 51.0 49.6 49.2
Government revenue 47.8 47.0 46.5 46.5 46.3 46.2
Budget balance -9.5 -11.5 -6.1 -4.5 -3.4 -3.0
Government debt 155.9 159.8 156.7 155.7 154.3 153.2
The coronavirus outbreak has led to a substantial deterioration in the public finances. The budget deficit expanded to 9.5% of GDP in 2020, from 1.6% in 2019. The debt/GDP ratio increased by more than 20 percentage points in 2020, to almost 156%.
The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the budget deficit and public debt to expand further in 2021, in view of additional government stimulus measures to support the economy as the pandemic drags on. In late May the government approved EUR40bn in new measures to extend support for the worst-hit businesses in the forms of tax relief, grants and loan guarantees, and to finance Italy's vaccination campaign. This follows a series of extra stimulus measures approved since the start of the pandemic worth more than EUR200bn (about 12% of 2019 GDP) in total.
The fiscal deficit will start to narrow in 2022, when the pandemic is expected to be under control and some of the stimulus measures will expire. As a consequence, we forecast that the budget deficit will slowly be reduced to 3% of GDP by 2025 and that public debt will stabilise at around 153% of GDP. Although EU fiscal rules have been suspended until at least 2022 in view of the exceptional circumstances, a multi-year fiscal adjustment will be required over the medium term, which will prove difficult to achieve.
Unprecedented asset purchases by the European Central Bank (ECB) will continue to mitigate risks to financial stability, shielding Italy's sovereign debt from liquidity problems and maintaining low refinancing costs. Inflows from the EU recovery fund will further expand the government's fiscal space.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Short-term interest rate (av) -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5
Deposit rate (av) 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9
Long-term interest rate (av) 1.2 0.8 1.4 1.8 2.1 2.4
The ECB's monetary policy will remain highly accommodative until at least the end of 2023. The deposit rate, which is currently the key ECB interest rate, stands at -0.5%, and we expect it to stay unchanged until end-2025. With interest rates at their effective lower bound, monetary policy will be conducted through quantitative easing (QE). The ECB is running two separate QE programmes: the asset purchase programme (APP), which is open-ended and runs at EUR20bn per month, and the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP), which has a maximum size of EUR1.85trn and a provisional end date of March 2022.
In the second quarter of 2021 the ECB accelerated asset purchases to EUR100bn per month to offset rising long-term interest rates and promised a similar pace of QE during the third quarter. We expect a gradual tapering from October, with an extension of the PEPP until June 2022 to avoid an abrupt correction in bond markets. We assume that monthly QE purchases will decline to EUR80bn in the fourth quarter of 2021 and EUR60bn in the first half of 2022. We expect purchases of about EUR30bn per month in the second half of 2022, under an extended APP, declining to EUR20bn per month in 2023. In 2024 net asset purchases will cease, but the ECB will continue to reinvest maturing bonds. The ECB's balance sheet will begin to shrink only in 2025, when we forecast that euro zone inflation will climb to 1.7%.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Economic growth (%)
US GDP -3.5 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.0
OECD GDP -4.8 4.9 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.0
EU27 GDP -6.3 4.5 4.3 2.6 2.2 2.0
World GDP -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
World trade -8.1 8.0 5.6 4.7 4.2 4.3
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
OECD CPI 1.2 2.8 2.2 2.0 2.0 2.1
EU27 CPI 0.6 2.0 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
Manufactures (measured in US$) 0.2 6.5 1.4 1.9 2.7 2.5
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 2.9 30.9 -2.3 0.1 -8.1 -0.1
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6
€ 3-month interbank rate (av; %) -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.14 1.20 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP -8.9 6.0 4.4 2.0 1.8 1.2
Private consumption -10.7 3.6 5.6 2.0 1.6 1.2
Government consumption 1.6 2.4 -1.0 0.6 0.3 0.3
Gross fixed investment -9.2 15.0 9.0 4.5 2.6 1.5
Exports of goods & services -14.5 11.2 6.5 3.7 3.1 2.5
Imports of goods & services -13.1 12.7 8.1 3.6 2.6 2.2
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -0.2 0.9 -0.1 -0.3 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand -8.4 6.4 4.8 1.9 1.6 1.1
Agriculture -6.0 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
Industry -10.5 8.0 2.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
Services -8.1 5.5 5.3 2.2 1.9 1.1
The Italian economy contracted by 8.9% in 2020 as a result of the supply- and demand-side shock stemming from the pandemic. Of the four biggest euro zone economies, Italy's downturn was the second steepest, after Spain (10.8%). We expect the economy to recover strongly in 2021, driven by investment and foreign trade. Private consumption will rebound, but only modestly, as precautionary savings remain high. Our forecast for 6% growth in 2021 will leave the economy 3.5% smaller than in 2019, with private consumption down by 7.5% and investment up by 4.5% from pre-crisis levels.
Economic growth has gathered strong momentum since the start of the year, as household and business confidence has surged, despite growing concerns about the rise in coronavirus infections and the emergence of new variants in many of Italy's main European markets. Generous monetary and fiscal stimulus measures (financed by both national and EU funds) are supporting the recovery, partly by mitigating losses of activity in the worst-affected sectors. The government's furlough schemes have been extended until end-August (and end-October for the worst-hit businesses in the services sector), supporting disposable income and savings accumulated during the lockdown. After collapsing in 2020, foreign travel will pick up to some extent in the second half of 2021, helping the embattled tourism sector, which accounts for 13% of GDP.
Assuming that Italy's vaccination programme stays on track, we expect solid growth to continue into 2022, when real GDP will return to its end-2019 level. We forecast that real GDP will expand further, by 4.4%, in 2022 and that growth will average 1.7% in 2023-25, supported by the EU-funded recovery investment and the government's reform programme.
The main downside risk concerns the epidemiological outlook: the risk that another severe wave of the virus will lead to a return to restrictions remains high. The Delta variant has spread rapidly across Europe, and there is concern about the emergence of new variants that are vaccine-resistant. If a resurgence of the virus results in the imposition of new restrictions, these would hit economic growth, with the retail sector particularly vulnerable to renewed business closures. The potential positive impact of the government's structural reform agenda on the business environment and growth outlook represents an upside risk to our growth expectations in the 2021-25 forecast period.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends The 2008-o9 global financial crisis and the subsequent euro area crisis had a severe impact on the Italian industrial sector. As a consequence, in 2020 industry (excluding construction) accounted for 23.8% of nominal gross value added, compared with 26.5% in 2007. The manufacturing sector has long been the main strength of the Italian economy, especially Italy's family-owned small and medium-sized export-oriented companies specialising in products that require high-quality design and engineering. However, the sector faces major challenges owing to Italy's structural problems, and concerns about the global economic outlook stemming from the lingering effects of the coronavirus pandemic on global trade, the ongoing trade war between the US and China, and rising trade tensions between the EU and the US. Our outlook for world trade volumes foresees growth of 8.9% in 2021, following an 8.1% contraction in 2020. In addition, the free-trade model that has dominated global trade discussions in recent decades is clearly in retreat. Italy and its biggest trading partner, Germany, are exposed to the trade protectionism that the US administrations have brought to bear on China. We expect US-China frictions to continue, especially over questions of technology, investment and finance.


Italian industry faces major challenges owing to structural deficiencies In 2020 manufacturing accounted for 16.4% of gross value added, down from 17.8% in 2007 and 20.3% in 1997. The sector's decline has largely been driven by the prolonged weakness of domestic demand, but also by the difficulties that Italian exporters face in remaining competitive within the European single currency area. Unit labour costs have remained well above the euro area average since 2005 and have continued to rise in Italy since 2010, whereas they have fallen in other peripheral euro area economies such as Spain, Greece, Ireland and Portugal. Weak competitiveness and further transfers of low-value-added production out of Italy are likely to lead to a further decline in manufacturing's contribution to the economy during the forecast period.
The automotive industry is one of the flagship sectors of Italian industry. It accounts for about 8% of GDP-almost a quarter of the contribution from all manufacturing industries and about 10% of the total value of Italian exports. Fiat (Fabbrica Italiana Automobili Torino), which was renamed Fiat-Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) in 2014 after merging with a US-based producer, is the dominant producer in Italy, but the sector also comprises hundreds of firms that manufacture components or provide related services.
Vehicle production in Italy has been declining since 2018. It fell by about 15% to 777,000 units at end-2020, well below its 2007 levels. The drop in Italian production disproportionately affected passenger-car output. In 2013 passenger-car output was more than 70% lower than in 2000, and production has been contracting sharply since 2018. This was mainly owing to the introduction of new EU emissions standards in 2019 that distorted industry statistics, and to the coronavirus-related restrictions in 2020, which slashed demand for motor vehicles in Europe and forced most automakers in the region to halt production temporarily. In 2020 the Italian government announced new purchase incentives for low-emission cars, and hybrid and electric vehicles (EVs). From August to December 2020 buyers of Euro 6 vehicles costing less than EUR40,000 will receive a subsidy of EUR3,500, instead of EUR1,500 previously, if they trade in cars older than ten years. Pure EVs costing less than EUR61,000 will also get a discount of EUR6,000, compared with EUR4,000 earlier. The 2021 Budget Law allocates EUR250m to car incentives.
Manufacturing sector performance will depend on the speed of reforms In the medium term the performance of the manufacturing sector will depend largely on the implementation of reforms to tackle Italy's structural deficiencies. These include issues such as a lack of competition, particularly in the non­tradeable services sectors and utilities. This has meant that companies in Italy pay high prices for domestically produced inputs, such as electricity, compared with competitors elsewhere. The predominance of small companies and their lack of investment in areas such as innovation, and research and development (R&D) has prevented them from moving up the value-added chain. There are about 388,000 manufacturing companies in Italy, about 97% of which employ fewer than 50 people. Firms with fewer than ten employees account for about 82% of the total.
Italian SMEs are often aggregated within sector-specific industrial districts, which, through a combination of co-operation and competition, helps to mitigate the impact of the difficulties arising from a lack of expansion. Italian SMEs have begun to consolidate under the pressure of intense competition and the global financial crisis. However, the availability of domestic funds to support mergers or recapitalisations to start new projects is likely to be curtailed by the need to reduce the government debt burden.
Construction sector activity is likely to rebound in 2021-25, owing to incentives Activity in the construction sector accounted for 4.3% of gross value added in 2020, down marginally from 2016, but well below an annual average of 6% of gross value added in 2006-09. After nine full-year contractions, which left output in the sector about a third below its 2006 peak in real terms, the decline appeared to bottom out in the final quarter of 2015. However, activity is likely to remain subdued during the forecast period, reflecting the impact of an eight-year decline in property prices up to 2016, as well as the coronavirus pandemic (construction contracted by 5.5% in 2020). We expect the sector to perform well in 2021-25 compared with recent years, mainly owing to construction-related economic stimulus measures introduced amid the pandemic. The "superbonus" scheme allows homeowners a tax deduction of up to 110% on expenses related to property renovation. This can be used in conjunction with the "sismabonus" and "ecobonus" to reduce seismic risk and make energy-efficiency upgrades. The government is planning to extend the scheme into 2023 given that many construction companies cannot start new work until 2022, owing to a sharp increase in demand for renovation projects.
Services will be significantly disrupted by the pandemic Already accounting for 74% of gross value added, the services sector will continue to be significantly disrupted by the pandemic. The hotel and restaurant sector have been the worst affected, along with other services related to tourism. We expect the tourism sector to recover from 2021, but only gradually. We do not expect international travel arrivals to return 2019 levels until 2024. The retail sector also suffered in 2020. In contrast, the information and communications technology (ICT) sector has benefited from the increase in remote working, and we expect a continued rise in its share of real value added. Sectors that serve mainly the domestic market and have so far enjoyed a high level of protection from competition will come under pressure as a result of reforms to reduce barriers to entry, but this is likely to be only gradual. High-value­added services sectors, such as design, that are closely tied to clothing, textiles and automotive-Italy's main export sectors-should continue to perform well, despite production in some sectors increasingly being moved abroad to countries where labour costs are lower.
Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Consumer price inflation (av; EU harmonised measure) -0.1 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5
Average wages 0.7 0.9 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.2
Real wages 0.8 -0.4 -0.4 -0.4 -0.4 -0.4
Unit labour costs 9.7 -0.6 -4.2 -1.5 2.5 4.0
Labour costs per hour (US$) 33.5 35.4 34.9 34.5 35.6 37.2
We expect price growth to firm to 1.3% on average in 2021, from -0.1% in 2020. Italian consumer prices have been on a general upward trend since the start of the year, mirroring developments across the EU and globally-albeit at a slower pace in Italy, given the excess capacity in the economy and weak wage growth. Inflationary pressures have been driven by higher energy costs and supply constraints that have pushed up producer prices, as well as stronger demand (boosted by the lifting of coronavirus-related restrictions). These trends are likely to continue. However, we believe that the marked acceleration in recent months will slow as supply catches up with pent-up demand and base effects wane. After slowing in 2022, we expect inflation to climb gradually, averaging about 1.4% per year in 2023-25, below the euro zone average.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.14 1.20 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
Exchange rate US$:€ (end-period) 1.23 1.18 1.16 1.15 1.20 1.23
Exchange rate ¥:€ (av) 121.8 129.9 129.4 128.6 132.8 135.9
Real effective exchange-rate index (2010=100; av) 95.0 94.8 93.3 91.9 92.1 92.7
Purchasing power parity €:US$ (av) 0.66 0.66 0.66 0.65 0.64 0.64
The euro averaged US$1.21:EUR1 in the first half of 2021. We expect it to end the year at about US$1.18:EUR1, with little change from its end-June value. In 2022-23 we forecast that the euro will depreciate against the dollar: real interest-rate differentials between the euro zone and the US are going to widen, as the ECB continues asset purchases while the Federal Reserve (the US central bank) begins to tighten its policy stance. In 2024-25 the euro will appreciate: by then, the ECB will have discontinued its QE programme and the euro zone will have completed its economic recovery, with rising market rates boosting demand for euro-denominated assets.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Current-account balance 69.74 80.58 77.29 75.88 71.90 71.74
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.7 3.8 3.5 3.4 3.1 2.9
Goods: exports fob 470.63 596.64 631.28 650.98 666.33 698.47
Goods: imports fob -393.32 -511.54 -552.04 -569.86 -586.53 -617.84
Trade balance 77.31 85.11 79.24 81.13 79.79 80.63
Services: credit 87.63 113.99 127.85 134.03 145.58 159.54
Services: debit -93.03 -118.24 -130.38 -137.23 -148.25 -159.40
Services balance -5.40 -4.25 -2.53 -3.19 -2.67 0.14
Primary income: credit 79.26 83.90 84.63 88.09 92.51 95.23
Primary income: debit -59.45 -63.29 -67.69 -73.58 -77.89 -83.17
Primary income balance 19.81 20.62 16.94 14.51 14.63 12.06
Secondary income: credit 18.89 25.03 31.14 31.53 30.98 32.90
Secondary income: debit -40.88 -45.92 -47.50 -48.10 -50.83 -53.98
Secondary income balance -21.99 -20.89 -16.36 -16.56 -19.85 -21.08
We expect the current account to remain in surplus and narrow gradually over the forecast period, from 3.8% of GDP in 2021 to 2.9% in 2025. With domestic demand picking up gradually from 2021, the value of goods imports will rise, driven by higher volumes and a moderate increase in international energy prices. We expect this trend to be mitigated to some extent by an improvement in Italy's merchandise export performance and a partial recovery in earnings from international tourism, as well as by the disbursement of EU recovery funds recorded under the secondary income account.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Italy Stocks and flows Net inward foreign direct investment (FDI) flows are low compared with most other EU countries, and Italy has generally been a net exporter of FDI. Net inflows declined to close to zero in 2012, owing to large disinvestments, before recovering moderately in 2013-17, averaging US$17.3bn per year (0.9% of GDP). Inward FDI rose by almost 300% to US$44.2bn in 2018 (equivalent to 2.1% of GDP), before dropping back to US$31.2bn in 2019 (equivalent to 1.6% of GDP) amid political volatility. In 2020 net inflows contracted by over 120% (US$6.4bn) owing to the coronavirus pandemic. Italy attracts less greenfield foreign investment than other large European economies. The total stock of FDI was US$574bn in 2019, about 60% of total FDI in France, a third of that in Germany and a quarter of that in the UK. In relation to GDP, the stock of FDI was 28.7% in 2019-lower than in every other EU country apart from Greece. FDI outflows have also generally been small, mainly reflecting the prevalence of small and medium-sized companies in Italy. In 2005-09 Italy recorded substantial outward FDI flows as a result of several major investments abroad in the banking and energy sectors. A similarly large outflow, of about US$52bn, was recorded in 2011-the year that Italian car manufacturer Fiat bought the US Treasury's remaining stake in Chrysler.
Origin and distribution FDI from Europe accounts for about 60-65% of company revenue and employment generated by foreign companies with operations in Italy. Companies from North America represent about 25-30% of revenue and employment, and those from Japan for about 3-4%. The manufacturing sector contributed about 40% of the total revenue and value-added of foreign­owned firms, but this has generally been on a downward path and dropped sharply in 2005, when General Motors (US) sold its stake in Fiat. The utilities and telecommunications sectors have registered the most rapid expansion. In 2019, the last year for which data are available (expressed according to the directional principle), the largest FDI stocks came from the Netherlands (US$63.4bn), Spain (US$40bn), Germany (US$35.7bn) and France (US$30.5bn).
Determinants The main attraction for foreign companies to set up operations in Italy is the size of the domestic market, which offers a population of about 6om and average GDP per head of US$41,181 at purchasing power parity (PPP). Deterrents include the complexity of Italy's legal system, inefficiencies in public administration, inadequate infrastructure-particularly in the south of the country-and often high regulatory barriers to entry, especially in services sectors. In addition, studies of the determinants of FDI in southern Italy have highlighted typical deterrents to investment, such as distance from major European markets, low presence of other foreign companies and a high level of organised crime. Such studies seem to indicate that fiscal incentives and the presence of specialised producer service providers have a low impact on foreign entrants' decisions, but that human capital is an important positive variable. Italy has an abundant workforce in the south, which has attracted a few high-technology investments to areas such as Catania in Sicily, where a Franco-Italian joint venture, ST Microelectronics, has a production plant and several research centres.
Impact According to the Italian Trade and Investment Agency (ITA), foreign-controlled companies employ more than 1m people in Italy and generate revenue of about EUR5oobn per year. Foreign companies invest on average three and half times more in research and development (R&D) than Italian companies. However, because of the comparatively low level of inflows and their concentration in the north of Italy, the impact of FDI on the Italian economy as a whole has been limited. The depressed areas of the south, which attract limited Italian private-sector investment, would benefit substantially in terms of employment and through the spillover effect of advanced technology, management practices and production processes. However, almost all of the inward FDI stock is located in the north and centre of the country. Despite massive state investment in 1950-84, the south has continued to lag central and northern Italy in GDP per head terms (at less than 55% of the average in the centre and north). The unemployment rate in the south is almost double the national average and about three times higher than that in the north.
Potential The possibility of higher FDI inflows in the forecast period (2021-25) will be hampered by the uncertainty caused by the Covid-19 pandemic and the fact that most of the factors that have deterred FDI in the past will remain in place. The previous Movimento 5 Stelle (M5S)-Lega administration implemented a less friendly policy stance towards foreign investment, marginally tightening labour contract regulations through its so-called Dignity Decree in 2018, and enforcing penalties on foreign firms that take advantage of government investment incentives and then divest or relocate production to other markets. Over the forecast period a slight improvement is expected in the efficiency of the public administration, as a result of recent and ongoing reforms. The performance of the state body responsible for attracting foreign investors may also improve. Given Italy's need to reduce its dependence on imported energy, there could be potential for investment in the still state-dominated energy sector as liberalisation continues to make progress and the authorities are forced to focus on investment in renewable energy sources. Under the current Draghi government, political opposition to foreign interest in ownership of utility networks and possibly some companies in the manufacturing sector is likely to continue, as such companies are deemed to be of a "strategic" nature. Banking sector reforms may increase opportunities for foreign investment in smaller Italian banks.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2015 2020 2025
Population (m)
Total 60.6 60.5 59.9
 Male 29.4 29.4 29.2
 Female 31.2 31.0 30.6
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 13.7 13.4 13.0
 15-64 65.1 64.5 63.6
 65+ 21.2 22.1 23.4
Young-age dependency ratio 0.21 0.21 0.20
Old-age dependency ratio 0.33 0.34 0.37
Working-age population (m) 39.4 39.0 38.1
Urbanisation (% of total) 69.6 71.0 72.5
Labour force (m) 25.4 25.0 25.2
       
Period averages   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth (%)   0.0 -0.2
Working-age population growth (%)   -0.2 -0.5
Labour force growth (%)   -0.3 0.2
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   8.1 7.3
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   10.3 10.7
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   3.2 3.1
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   80.6 81.6
 Female   85.1 85.7
 Average   82.9 83.7
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; Economist Intelligence Unit estimates and forecasts; national statistics.
Population growth is projected to decline Having declined for several years in the late 1990s, Italy's total population increased moderately in 1999-2017, rising by an average of 0.4% per year. Since then the population has started to decline again, to 60.5m in 2020, according to the UN's population estimates. This has been mainly driven by the natural decline of the Italian population, which has outpaced immigration. In 2020 the coronavirus pandemic also put downward pressure on Italy's death and birth rates, and on immigrant arrivals. The number of births in Italy was the lowest recorded since the country's unification in 1861, while the death toll was the highest recorded in any year since the second world war. Italy's immigrant population dropped significantly to about 80,000 last year, or around 1.3 per 1,000 residents-about half the rate of arrivals in 2019. The Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts that the population will fall in the long term, as the expectation of scarce job opportunities owing to the weakness of the economy has reduced the influx of immigrants and driven further emigration of young Italians.
Policies have frequently done the opposite of what has been needed to address the impact of Italy's unfavourable demographics. The previous short-lived Movimento 5 Stelle (M5S)-Lega government's tough stance on immigration discouraged foreigners from settling in Italy. Since the EU's March 2016 agreement with Turkey, the flow of irregular migrants from Turkey to Greece and on to northern Europe has more or less ceased. Migrant inflows from the eastern Mediterranean route have also been declining since 2018, partly owing to stepped-up collaboration with the Libyan authorities. In the past most migrants arriving in Italy moved on to other EU countries, notably Germany.
According to Istat (the national statistics office), the proportion of foreign residents in the total population increased from 4.5% in 2005 to 8.8% at end-2019, and has stabilised since then. The majority of immigrants live in the north and the centre of Italy, where foreign residents accounted for more than 10% of the population at end-2019. The five largest national groups are Romanians, Albanians, Moroccans, Chinese and Ukrainians, which together account for about 50% of the total number of foreign residents.
Even during periods of modest economic growth, shortages of skilled and even unskilled workers are likely to re-emerge in areas of high employment such as the north east, owing to deficiencies in the labour market.
Reforms seek to increase labour mobility The steady rise in the employment rate (the percentage of people aged 20-64 in employment) since the mid-1990s came to a halt in 2008. According to Eurostat, the employment rate stood at 62.3% in 2016, just below the 62.9% employment rate in 2008, but 10 percentage points lower than the EU28 average and the third-lowest rate in the EU. The reasons for this include cultural factors, but also the low effective retirement age and limited mobility from areas of high unemployment in the south to those of high employment in the north. Low labour mobility has been perpetuated to a large extent by the greater use of temporary employment contracts, especially for young workers, poor active labour market policies and an inadequate system of unemployment benefits. The labour market reforms approved since 2012 will gradually address some of these issues during the forecast period (2021-25). In spite of the projected decline in the working-age population during the forecast period, the labour force will increase moderately. This will reflect greater female participation and pension reforms, which have reduced the incentive for early retirement.
The rise in the proportion of the elderly will put pressure on pensions During the forecast period the number of people reaching working age will be considerably lower than the number of people reaching 65. As a result, Italy's old-age dependency ratio (the ratio of people aged over 65 to those of working age) will rise further. At 34% in 2020, it is already the highest in the EU. This trend, combined with the ongoing rise in life expectancy, will continue to put upward pressure on public expenditure on pensions and care for the elderly. Italy's public pension spending has been on a steadily rising trend and is among the highest in the EU as a share of GDP. According to figures from the Ministry of the Economy, public pension spending is projected to decline gradually over the next ten years, from a peak of about 16% in 2013-14, owing to a series of reforms introduced since the beginning of the 1990s. However, costs could decline less markedly or even rise owing to the lingering effects of a partial rollback in 2018 by the previous M5S-Lega government of the 2011 Fornero pension reform, the most recent effort to improve the social security system's sustainability. The so-called Quota 100 enables retirement at age 62 with 38 years of contributions until 2022.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Population (m) 60.5 60.4 60.3 60.1 60.0 59.9
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,883 2,116 2,188 2,216 2,342 2,487
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 31,151 35,046 36,313 36,844 39,023 41,539
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2,490 2,676 2,855 2,982 3,096 3,189
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 41,181 44,332 47,382 49,581 51,575 53,259
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 1,211 1,295 1,291 1,292 1,348 1,423
Median household income (US$) 41,325 44,449 44,161 43,503 45,292 47,717
Household consumption (US$ bn) 1,092 1,200 1,247 1,255 1,317 1,396
Household consumption per head (US$) 18,070 19,880 20,700 20,860 21,950 23,320
Exports of goods & services (% change) -14.5 11.2 6.5 3.7 3.1 2.5
Imports of goods & services (% change) -13.1 12.7 8.1 3.6 2.6 2.2
Italy is one of the largest markets in Europe, with a population of just over 60m, and is one of its most affluent nations. However, growth potential remains limited because the country is a mature consumer market with weak income and population growth prospects.
Cost-consciousness will remain an important consumer trend In 2020 consumer sentiment and spending were constrained by the practical disruptions caused by measures enacted to slow the spread of the coronavirus, as well as by a sharp rise in unemployment. In 2020 retail sales volumes were down by 6.2% compared with 2019-the largest year-on-year fall on record. The closure of all non-essential commercial activities in March-May 2020 had an immediate and direct impact on consumption in the country, with the travel, enter-tainment, hospitality and dining industries the most affected. Supported by the steady rollout of the vaccination programme, the release of pent-up demand and high levels of savings accumulated during successive lockdowns, retail sales volume growth accelerated from 0.5% quarter on quarter in January-March 2021 to 2.9% in April-June. Non-food sales were the main driver of growth, rising by 1.1% in volume terms in the first quarter and by 4.8% in the second. However, even if the Italian economy recovers substantially in 2021-22, con-sumer activity is likely to remain constrained, as precautionary savings will remain high. Many customers will remain cautious, given the uncertain out-look, and cost-consciousness will remain an important trend. Fear of contagion will continue to deter people from attending public spaces. Con-sumption of durable goods, which can be delayed, is likely to recover rapidly. However, industries that produce non-durable goods and services will suffer a permanent loss of revenue. This type of consumption tends to be non-deferrable, and even if households wished to spend more after the crisis, capacity constraints and social distancing rules will prevent businesses from recouping lost revenue.
In terms of private consumption per head, Italy is just below the euro area average, but well below Finland, Sweden, France and Germany. However, the relative weakness of Italian economic growth for much of the past 15-20 years means that GDP per head-at purchasing power parity (PPP) conversion rates that explicitly adjust for differences in price levels between countries-has fallen steadily as a percentage of the EU28 average, remaining below 100% since 2013. GDP per head at PPP rates stood at an estimated US$44,004 in 2019. Income levels differ greatly on a regional basis, with GDP per head in the south about 46% of that in the north. Development policies in the past 50 years have done little to close the gap.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
US$ bn            
Food, beverages & tobacco 228.9 243.2 248.9 247.2 257.8 275.1
Housing & household fuels 243.4 267.0 280.1 284.9 300.8 322.6
Clothing & footwear 61.6 68.5 69.6 69.0 72.3 76.4
Household goods & services 68.9 75.4 78.2 78.5 81.9 86.5
Health 38.1 42.2 44.4 44.8 46.5 49.1
Transport & communications 158.0 185.2 193.6 195.5 206.3 210.9
Leisure & education 85.7 93.6 97.5 98.2 102.9 109.6
Hotels & restaurants 109.5 120.3 125.4 126.3 132.7 141.8
Other 98.2 105.0 109.5 110.3 116.2 124.4
Total 1,092.3 1,200.4 1,247.3 1,254.6 1,317.4 1,396.3
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 21.0 20.3 20.0 19.7 19.6 19.7
Housing & household fuels 22.3 22.2 22.5 22.7 22.8 23.1
Clothing & footwear 5.6 5.7 5.6 5.5 5.5 5.5
Household goods & services 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.2 6.2
Health 3.5 3.5 3.6 3.6 3.5 3.5
Transport & communications 14.5 15.4 15.5 15.6 15.7 15.1
Leisure & education 7.8 7.8 7.8 7.8 7.8 7.8
Hotels & restaurants 10.0 10.0 10.1 10.1 10.1 10.2
Other 9.0 8.7 8.8 8.8 8.8 8.9
Despite relatively high income levels, spending on food, beverages and tobacco is still high as a share of total consumer spending, at about 18%-just above the level in France, but significantly above that in the Netherlands (about 15%), Germany (13.9%) and the UK (12%). We expect it to decline only gradually during the forecast period (2021-25), largely because of subdued spending on other categories of goods and services.
Consumer credit demand has begun to rise after several years of stagnation and/or contraction. Household indebtedness is relatively low, and interest rates on consumer loans have declined and are expected to remain subdued in 2021-25, containing the proportion of disposable income spent on debt servicing. Still, we expect only moderately stronger demand for big-ticket items and branded goods, as consumers are likely to postpone purchases until sentiment improves further and risks to the recovery diminish. Rates of ownership of traditional consumer durable goods, such as white goods and passenger cars, are generally high, so demand will be driven by technological change and the need to replace ageing stock. Demand for electronic goods, such as computers (especially laptops and tablets) and smartphones, has shown a tendency to outperform the rest of the consumer goods market.
The ageing population will drive growth in healthcare spending Demographic trends will have an important impact on spending patterns. The ageing population will continue to drive overall healthcare spending, but we expect efforts to curb public healthcare expenditure to be introduced in order to meet budgetary targets.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2020   2025  
  Italy Western Europe (av) Italy Western Europe (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 9.0 10.8 9.4 10.7
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 2,804 4,415 3,868 5,875
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.3
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.1
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 21.0 19.5 19.7 18.4
Meat consumption (kg per person) 85.8 86.4 94.5 94.5
Milk consumption (litres per person) 257.0 258.0 279.0 276.0
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 5.8 6.1 6.4 6.5
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 638 544 643 557
Telephone main lines 302 409 261 372
Mobile phone subscribers 1,270 1,210 1,350 1,260
Television sets 474 823 490 908
Personal computers 678 832 721 859
Households
No. of households (m) 26.1 191.4 26.7 199.3
No. of people per household (av) 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.1
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 41,320 49,780 47,720 58,370
Average monthly wage (US$) 2,840 3,850 3,270 4,620
Gini index 35.9 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); Economist Intelligence Unit estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population -0.24 -0.41 -0.35
Working-age population -0.68 -1.16 -1.00
Working-age minus total population -0.44 -0.76 -0.65
Labour force -0.22 -1.02 -0.75
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 2.0 0.7 1.2
Growth of real GDP 1.7 0.3 0.8
Labour productivity growth 1.6 1.4 1.5
Growth of capital stock 1.5 0.8 1.1
Total factor productivity growth 1.1 0.7 0.8
Initial conditions: Italy's economic growth performance has been poor in the past two decades, even in comparison with the sluggish average rate of growth achieved by core countries within the EU. As well as undergoing severe fiscal consolidation during the 1990s in order to join the euro area, which dampened growth in that decade, the Italian economy has suffered from a steady loss of competitiveness owing to low productivity growth and rising unit labour costs (reflecting falling output, despite wage moderation since 1993)-in contrast to the situation in its main trading partners.
The weakness of Italy's political and institutional framework policy hinders policy formulation, as reforms are frequently delayed or watered down under pressure from a wide range of interest groups. The current administration is unlikely to enact policy changes that will improve the country's com-petitiveness substantially. Italy's public finances also remain weak, limiting the scope to reduce taxation or stimulate demand during cyclical downturns. This will hold back capital spending in the medium to long term. Major brakes on Italy's long-term growth will be the country's unfavourable demographic profile, low labour participation rates, a collapse in fixed investment in 2020, and low levels of investment in research and development (R&D).
Unfavourable demographic trends will weigh on long-term growth Demographic trends: Italy's demographic profile is particularly unfavourable. Projected net immigration will be insufficient to halt the continued decline in the working-age population in the long-term forecast period (2021-50). Italy's labour market participation rate is expected to rise from the current low levels of about 66%, but only moderately, reflecting an increase in the number of women joining the workforce and a gradual rise in the minimum retirement age. However, it will remain well below the OECD average (about 72% in 2018) and will be insufficient to prevent an annual average decline in the labour force of 0.8% in 2021-50.
External conditions: Italian companies have generally been slow to adapt to the rigours of fixed exchange rates in the euro area and the increase in competition from goods produced in low-cost developing countries, although some traditional manufacturing sectors have undergone restructuring in recent years, notably textiles and clothing, and automotive. This difficulty seems unlikely to change in the medium to long term. Small and medium-sized export-oriented manufacturing companies have struggled to compete in some low- to medium-technology sectors. This is attributed to the lack of investment in R&D, innovation and marketing, as well as to difficulties in protecting and promoting the generic ''Made in Italy" brand, which has long been considered synonymous with good quality and style. To survive, Italian companies will have to expand in size and increasingly outsource low-value-added production to locations in central and eastern Europe and Asia, where costs-especially labour costs-are lower.
With institutional change off the agenda, economic reform will be slow Institutions and policy trends: Italy's poor growth performance has raised concerns among policymakers about the country's future economic prospects. Policy responses triggered by such debates in the past have generally been short lived. Some reforms have been introduced since the financial turmoil of late 2011. However, popular and political resistance to reform halted the Renzi government's attempt to overhaul Italy's institutional framework in 2014-16, taking institutional change off the political agenda for the foreseeable future. Without a substantial improvement in its political and institutional framework, Italy's efforts to carry out reforms will continue to lag the rapid pace of change in the world economy and the increase in competition.
In particular, Italy will need further liberalisation of its product and services markets, although recent reforms, if they are not reversed, should help to reduce labour market rigidities over the medium to long term. A more comprehensive system of unemployment protection envisaged under the 2012 and 2014 reforms could help to enhance labour mobility, but there may be a lack of resources. Without more drastic cuts in public spending on pensions, this will now rise again until late 2040. The previous Movimento 5 Stelle (M5S)-Lega government partially rolled back the most recent reform, passed in 2011, which will lead to a deterioration in the pension spending profile. To raise long-term productivity growth, the country will also have to improve the quality of human capital. Recent education reforms have sought to address shortcomings in the education system, including high drop-out rates and mismatches between the skills needed by employers and qualifications held by potential employees.
A more favourable policy environment would boost long-term growth Long-term performance: The Economist Intelligence Unit's baseline forecast is that Italian GDP growth will average 0.8% per year in 2021-50. The main brake on long-term growth will be an unfavourable demographic profile, which will be offset only partly by expected moderate improvements in labour productivity and technological infrastructure. Other industrialised countries will continue to grow faster than Italy, and so it will fall further behind in terms of GDP per head, which in the decade to 2019 fell from 107% of the EU28 average to 96%. In addition, decades of massive public-sector spending have done little to narrow the large income gap between the more developed centre and north of Italy, and the south of the country. This imbalance is expected to continue to weigh on Italy's overall growth performance in the long term. A more favourable political environment could produce a better economic growth performance in the long term, but the chance of improvements in Italy's institutional framework being implemented in the short to medium term is limited.
Income and market size
  2020 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 60.5 59.0 54.4
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,883.4 2,796.7 4,959.5
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 31,150 47,380 91,200
Private consumption (US$ bn) 1,092.3 1,601.3 2,680.3
Private consumption per head (US$) 18,070 27,130 49,290
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2,489.9 3,634.5 5,899.6
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 41,180 61,570 108,480
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 552.1 1,082.6 2,342.8
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 484.2 995.0 2,080.9
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 65.1 66.2 60.5
Share of world population (%) 0.8 0.7 0.6
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 2.3 1.9 1.3
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 1.9 1.7 1.1
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 2.5 2.5 1.8
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability Climate change is expected to have a moderate, but clearly negative effect on Italian living standards and the economy. Hotter summers increase the risk of drought, particularly in the country's southern and island regions, in many parts of which water is scarce. This will have an impact on food crops and agricultural production, and could affect human health, especially among the country's growing elderly population. In addition to putting traditional agricultural products such as citrus fruits and wine grapes at risk, an increased incidence of drought will also heighten the risk of wildfires. Italy has about 7,600 km of coastline, and rising sea levels could put some low-lying coastal areas of the country at risk of flooding. Rising seas will be particularly problematic for the city of Venice, a major tourist destination and a regional capital, and more erratic weather patterns are likely to strain ageing infrastructure. The Economist Intelligence Unit's model to evaluate the impact of climate change on long-term growth finds that the Italian economy will be 2.8% smaller in 2050 than it would have been without this hit to growth.
Technological developments Despite Italy's sizeable manufacturing base and the presence of some notable high-technology firms, technological uptake has been limited, constrained in part by small average firm size and family management, which in some cases limits innovation. In 2017-18 a representative survey of nearly 24,000 industrial firms conducted by the Ministry of Economic Development found that only 8.4% had implemented technologies associated with "Industry 4.0" or the trend towards automation and data exchange in manufacturing, such as 3D printing, the Internet of Things, Cloud technologies, or Big Data analytics. The share rises sharply in firms with 250 or more employees, to about 47%, from 6% for firms with fewer than ten employees. In 2017 research and development (R&D) spending accounted for just 1.35% of GDP-well below the EU average of 2%. Meanwhile the trade balance of high-technology goods stood at -0.54% of GDP in 2015 (latest data available). Since 2016, a series of tax credits and deductions known as Impresa 4.0 has been introduced to encourage investment in R&D and productivity-enhancing technologies, but a higher level of direct support and possibly an upskilling of the labour force may be necessary to take full advantage of technological advances. Persons with a tertiary degree or employed in science and technology account for about 33% of total employment, and higher education suffers from relatively high dropout rates and long university completion times.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 2.5 3.1 3.0 2.3 -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
EU27 GDP growth 2.0 2.9 2.1 1.7 -6.3 4.5 4.3 2.6 2.2 2.0
Western Europe growth 1.9 2.8 1.9 1.4 -6.2 4.6 4.3 2.4 2.1 1.9
World trade growth 2.1 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 8.0 5.6 4.7 4.2 4.3
US CPI 1.3 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
EU27 CPI 0.2 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.0 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
Manufactures export price -2.2 1.9 5.1 -1.4 0.2 6.5 1.4 1.9 2.7 2.5
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 44.0 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
€ 3-month rate -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5
US$:€ (av) 1.11 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.20 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
¥:€ (av) 120.35 126.63 130.47 122.07 121.85 129.91 129.37 128.63 132.83 135.90
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Expenditure on GDP (€ bn at current market prices)
GDP 1,696.5 1,738.5 1,771.4 1,790.7 1,650.3 1,769.9 1,870.4 1,931.2 1,993.3 2,047.1
Private consumption 1,019.5 1,046.0 1,066.2 1,074.7 957.1 1,004.2 1,066.1 1,093.4 1,121.2 1,149.2
Government consumption 322.7 327.0 334.6 335.0 345.0 359.5 360.0 366.7 372.9 379.8
Gross fixed investment 291.3 304.2 316.3 321.7 293.1 339.7 386.9 414.5 436.0 444.8
Exports of goods & services 496.6 536.2 555.0 568.7 483.8 592.6 641.1 677.2 684.8 700.2
Imports of goods & services 441.7 486.4 512.4 509.3 424.3 536.1 591.8 623.6 624.6 629.9
Stockbuilding 8.1 11.6 11.6 -0.2 -4.3 10.0 8.0 3.0 3.0 3.0
Domestic demand 1,641.6 1,688.8 1,728.8 1,731.3 1,590.8 1,713.4 1,821.0 1,877.5 1,933.1 1,976.8
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 1,877.3 1,963.3 2,092.9 2,004.8 1,883.4 2,115.6 2,188.4 2,216.1 2,342.1 2,487.2
Private consumption 1,128.2 1,181.2 1,259.7 1,203.2 1,092.3 1,200.4 1,247.3 1,254.6 1,317.4 1,396.3
Government consumption 357.0 369.3 395.4 375.1 393.8 429.7 421.2 420.8 438.2 461.4
Gross fixed investment 322.4 343.5 373.7 360.2 334.5 406.1 452.7 475.6 512.4 540.4
Exports of goods & services 549.6 605.5 655.7 636.8 552.1 708.4 750.1 777.1 804.6 850.8
Imports of goods & services 488.8 549.3 605.4 570.3 484.2 640.8 692.4 715.5 733.9 765.4
Stockbuilding 9.0 13.1 13.8 -0.2 -5.0 12.0 9.4 3.4 3.5 3.6
Domestic demand 1,816.6 1,907.1 2,042.5 1,938.3 1,815.5 2,048.1 2,130.6 2,154.5 2,271.4 2,401.8
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 60.1 60.2 60.2 60.0 58.0 56.7 57.0 56.6 56.2 56.1
Government consumption 19.0 18.8 18.9 18.7 20.9 20.3 19.2 19.0 18.7 18.6
Gross fixed investment 17.2 17.5 17.9 18.0 17.8 19.2 20.7 21.5 21.9 21.7
Stockbuilding 0.5 0.7 0.7 0.0 -0.3 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.1
Exports of goods & services 29.3 30.8 31.3 31.8 29.3 33.5 34.3 35.1 34.4 34.2
Imports of goods & services 26.0 28.0 28.9 28.4 25.7 30.3 31.6 32.3 31.3 30.8
Memorandum item
National savings ratio (%) 20.2 20.8 21.0 21.1 21.2 23.6 24.6 25.0 25.1 24.8
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Real expenditure on GDP (€ bn at chained 2015 market prices)
GDP 1,677.5 1,706.7 1,720.6 1,725.5 1,571.4 1,665.7 1,739.0 1,773.6 1,804.9 1,826.5
Private consumption 1,018.4 1,033.8 1,043.9 1,047.0 934.6 968.5 1,023.1 1,043.4 1,060.6 1,072.8
Government consumption 318.5 318.3 318.7 316.0 321.0 328.7 325.4 327.4 328.3 329.3
Gross fixed investment 291.7 301.6 310.3 313.8 284.9 327.6 357.1 373.1 383.0 388.7
Exports of goods & services 500.4 530.7 539.3 549.5 469.8 522.4 556.4 576.9 594.6 609.4
Imports of goods & services 459.5 489.8 503.7 501.3 435.4 490.6 530.1 549.3 563.7 575.9
Stockbuilding (% of GDP) 8.1 11.6 11.6 -0.2 -4.3 10.0 8.0 3.0 3.0 3.0
Domestic demand 1,636.6 1,665.2 1,684.5 1,676.7 1,536.1 1,634.8 1,713.5 1,746.9 1,774.9 1,793.9
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 1.4 1.7 0.8 0.3 -8.9 6.0 4.4 2.0 1.8 1.2
Private consumption 1.2 1.5 1.0 0.3 -10.7 3.6 5.6 2.0 1.6 1.2
Government consumption 0.7 -0.1 0.1 -0.8 1.6 2.4 -1.0 0.6 0.3 0.3
Gross fixed investment 4.2 3.4 2.9 1.1 -9.2 15.0 9.0 4.5 2.6 1.5
Exports of goods & services 1.9 6.1 1.6 1.9 -14.5 11.2 6.5 3.7 3.1 2.5
Imports of goods & services 4.1 6.6 2.8 -0.5 -13.1 12.7 8.1 3.6 2.6 2.2
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) 0.4 0.2 0.0 -0.7 -0.2 0.9 -0.1 -0.3 0.0 0.0
Domestic demand 2.0 1.7 1.2 -0.5 -8.4 6.4 4.8 1.9 1.6 1.1
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 0.7 0.9 0.6 0.2 -6.5 2.2 3.3 1.2 1.0 0.7
Government consumption 0.1 0.0 0.0 -0.2 0.3 0.5 -0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1
Gross fixed investment 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.2 -1.7 2.7 1.8 0.9 0.6 0.3
External balance -0.5 0.0 -0.3 0.7 -0.8 -0.2 -0.3 0.1 0.2 0.1
Memorandum item
Real personal disposable income (% change) 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.3 -2.9 0.8 1.3 1.5 1.0 0.7
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Origin of GDP (€ bn at chained 2015 prices)
GDP at factor cost 1,509 1,534 1,547 1,550 1,416 1,501 1,567 1,598 1,627 1,646
Agriculture 34 33 33 33 31 31 31 31 31 31
Industry 355 367 372 371 332 359 366 371 377 383
Services 1,120 1,135 1,142 1,146 1,053 1,112 1,170 1,196 1,218 1,232
Origin of GDP (% change)
Agriculture -0.1 -3.8 1.8 -2.0 -6.0 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
Industry 3.2 3.3 1.3 -0.1 -10.5 8.0 2.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
Services 1.0 1.3 0.6 0.4 -8.1 5.5 5.3 2.2 1.9 1.1
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 2.1 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.0 2.0 1.9 1.9
Industry 23.7 23.8 23.9 23.8 23.8 24.2 23.7 23.6 23.5 23.6
Services 74.2 74.0 73.9 74.0 74.0 73.7 74.3 74.5 74.6 74.5
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) 2.1 3.8 0.9 -1.2 -11.0 11.0 4.0 1.6 1.5 1.5
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth -0.1 0.5 -0.1 -0.3 -6.4 6.3 3.0 0.5 1.0 0.6
Total factor productivity growth 0.8 1.1 0.2 -0.1 -6.8 5.9 2.8 0.2 0.4 0.0
Growth of capital stock -0.9 -0.4 0.0 0.2 -1.1 0.9 2.0 2.4 2.4 2.3
Growth of potential GDP 0.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 -0.3 6.8 4.2 1.1 0.8 0.5
Growth of real GDP 1.4 c 1.7 c 0.8 c 0.3 c -8.9 c 6.0 4.4 2.0 1.8 1.2
Growth of real GDP per head 1.3 c 1.7 c 0.9 c 0.4 c -8.8 c 6.2 4.6 2.2 2.0 1.4
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 60.7 60.7 60.6 60.6 60.5 60.4 60.3 60.1 60.0 59.9
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 1,877 1,963 2,093 2,005 1,883 2,116 2,188 2,216 2,342 2,487
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 30,947 32,359 34,520 33,111 31,151 35,046 36,313 36,844 39,023 41,539
Private consumption (US$ bn) 1,128 1,181 1,260 1,203 1,092 1,200 1,247 1,255 1,317 1,396
Private consumption per head (US$) 18,597 19,468 20,778 19,872 18,066 19,885 20,698 20,859 21,949 23,320
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 2,422 2,520 2,605 2,679 2,490 2,676 2,855 2,982 3,096 3,189
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 39,923 41,534 42,973 44,239 41,181 44,332 47,382 49,581 51,575 53,259
GDP (€ bn) 1,696 1,739 1,771 1,791 1,650 1,770 1,870 1,931 1,993 2,047
Private consumption (€ bn) 1,020 1,046 1,066 1,075 957 1,004 1,066 1,093 1,121 1,149
Personal disposable income (€ bn) 1,046 1,068 1,087 1,095 1,061 1,083 1,103 1,126 1,147 1,171
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 1,157 1,206 1,284 1,226 1,211 1,295 1,291 1,292 1,348 1,423
Growth of real disposable income (%) 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.3 -2.9 0.8 1.3 1.5 1.0 0.7
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.82 0.81 0.80 0.79 0.79 0.78 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.77
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 2.48 2.44 2.46 2.32 2.25 2.30 2.25 2.17 2.17 2.18
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 2.12 2.09 2.04 2.00 1.90 1.91 1.92 1.89 1.86 1.82
Share of world exports of goods (%) 2.88 2.84 2.81 2.79 2.76 2.93 2.90 2.86 2.79 2.77
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 49.1 48.7 48.4 48.6 57.3 58.5 52.5 51.0 49.6 49.2
Interest 3.9 3.8 3.6 3.4 3.5 3.2 3.5 3.7 3.8 3.9
Non-interest 45.1 44.9 44.7 45.3 53.9 55.2 49.0 47.3 45.8 45.2
Government revenue 46.7 46.3 46.2 47.1 47.8 47.0 46.5 46.5 46.3 46.2
Budget balance -2.4 -2.4 -2.2 -1.6 -9.5 -11.5 -6.1 -4.5 -3.4 -3.0
Primary balance 1.5 1.3 1.5 1.8 -6.0 -8.3 -2.5 -0.8 0.4 0.9
Government debt 134.7 134.0 134.4 134.6 155.9 159.8 156.7 155.7 154.3 153.2
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate US$:€ (av) 1.11 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.20 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
Exchange rate US$:€ (end-period) 1.05 1.20 1.15 1.12 1.23 1.18 1.16 1.15 1.20 1.23
Exchange rate ¥:€ (av) 120.35 126.63 130.47 122.07 121.85 129.91 129.37 128.63 132.83 135.90
Exchange rate £:€ (av) 0.82 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.86 0.84 0.82 0.82 0.84
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 94.6 c 95.3 c 96.8 c 94.5 c 95.0 c 94.8 93.3 91.9 92.1 92.7
Purchasing power parity €:US$ (av) 0.70 0.69 0.68 0.67 0.66 0.66 0.66 0.65 0.64 0.64
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 4.8 4.4 2.4 6.0 10.8 7.3 5.8 4.7 4.5 3.7
Domestic credit growth (%) 2.3 -0.6 0.3 1.4 7.3 4.4 2.8 2.3 3.0 2.6
Lending rate (av; %) 3.5 3.0 2.7 2.6 2.3 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1
Short-term interest rate (av; %) -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5
Long-term interest rate (av; %) 1.5 2.1 2.6 2.0 1.2 0.8 1.4 1.8 2.1 2.4
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 25.7 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.0 25.2 25.5 25.5 25.4 25.2
Labour force (% change) 1.1 0.8 0.2 -0.2 -3.4 0.9 1.1 0.1 -0.6 -0.5
Employment (m) 22.7 23.0 23.2 23.3 22.7 22.6 22.9 23.3 23.4 23.6
Employment (% change) 1.5 1.2 0.9 0.5 -2.7 -0.3 1.4 1.5 0.8 0.6
Unemployment (m) 3.0 2.9 2.8 2.6 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.2 1.9 1.6
Unemployment rate (%) 11.7 11.3 10.7 10.0 9.3 10.3 10.0 8.8 7.5 6.5
Unemployment rate (av, %; EU/OECD standardised measure) 11.7 11.3 10.7 10.0 9.3 10.3 10.0 9.7 9.2 8.9
Wage and price inflation (% except labour costs per hour)
GDP deflator 1.1 0.7 1.1 0.8 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.5
Consumer prices (av; EU harmonised measure) 0.0 1.3 1.3 0.6 -0.1 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5
Producer prices (av) -2.2 2.6 3.9 0.1 -4.4 6.3 1.7 1.3 1.0 1.0
GDP deflator (av) 1.1 0.7 1.1 0.8 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.5
Private consumption deflator (av) 0.1 1.1 1.0 0.5 -0.2 1.3 0.5 0.6 0.9 1.3
Government consumption deflator (av) 1.3 1.4 2.2 1.0 1.4 1.7 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5
Fixed investment deflator (av) -0.1 1.0 1.0 0.6 0.4 0.8 4.5 2.5 2.5 0.5
Average nominal wages 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.2
Average real wages 0.6 -0.7 -0.3 0.4 0.8 -0.4 -0.4 -0.4 -0.4 -0.4
Unit labour costs (€-based; av) 0.6 c 0.2 c 1.0 c 1.3 c 7.6 c -5.1 -2.1 0.4 0.1 0.6
Unit labour costs (US$-based) 0.3 c 2.2 c 5.7 c -4.0 c 9.7 c -0.6 -4.2 -1.5 2.5 4.0
Labour costs per hour (€) 28.5 c 28.7 c 28.9 c 29.2 c 29.3 c 29.6 29.8 30.0 30.3 30.6
Labour costs per hour (US$) 31.6 c 32.4 c 34.1 c 32.6 c 33.5 c 35.4 34.9 34.5 35.6 37.2
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 48.4 51.5 52.1 64.0 69.7 80.6 77.3 75.9 71.9 71.7
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 2.6 2.6 2.5 3.2 3.7 3.8 3.5 3.4 3.1 2.9
Goods: exports fob 450.8 491.2 532.9 513.8 470.6 596.6 631.3 651.0 666.3 698.5
Goods: imports fob -385.0 -429.4 -478.8 -446.5 -393.3 -511.5 -552.0 -569.9 -586.5 -617.8
Trade balance 65.8 61.8 54.1 67.3 77.3 85.1 79.2 81.1 79.8 80.6
Services: credit 100.8 112.7 123.1 122.2 87.6 114.0 127.8 134.0 145.6 159.5
Services: debit -105.2 -116.9 -126.6 -123.2 -93.0 -118.2 -130.4 -137.2 -148.2 -159.4
Services balance -4.3 -4.2 -3.5 -1.0 -5.4 -4.2 -2.5 -3.2 -2.7 0.1
Primary income: credit 70.8 82.0 93.0 86.2 79.3 83.9 84.6 88.1 92.5 95.2
Primary income: debit -65.4 -71.2 -71.0 -69.3 -59.4 -63.3 -67.7 -73.6 -77.9 -83.2
Primary income balance 5.4 10.8 22.0 16.9 19.8 20.6 16.9 14.5 14.6 12.1
Secondary income: credit 17.5 18.6 20.1 18.1 18.9 25.0 31.1 31.5 31.0 32.9
Secondary income: debit -35.9 -35.6 -40.7 -37.3 -40.9 -45.9 -47.5 -48.1 -50.8 -54.0
Secondary income balance -18.4 -17.0 -20.6 -19.2 -22.0 -20.9 -16.4 -16.6 -19.8 -21.1
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 83.6 c 87.5 c 94.4 c 89.1 c 87.1 c 102.2 101.7 101.7 101.4 104.1
Export prices (% change) -1.0 c 4.7 c 7.9 c -5.6 c -2.2 c 17.3 -0.5 0.0 -0.3 2.7
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 79.6 c 83.9 c 89.9 c 85.5 c 82.8 c 99.7 99.9 99.7 98.7 100.0
Import prices (% change) -5.7 c 5.5 c 7.0 c -4.9 c -3.1 c 20.3 0.2 -0.2 -1.0 1.3
Terms of trade (2010=100) 105.0 c 104.2 c 105.0 c 104.3 c 105.2 c 102.6 101.8 102.0 102.7 104.1
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 4.0 c 5.7 c 3.4 c 1.3 c -6.4 c 7.6 5.8 4.2 3.6 3.5
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment 25.7 11.1 44.2 31.2 -6.4 9.0 16.2 15.4 16.2 16.7
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 1.4 0.6 2.1 1.6 -0.3 0.4 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 8.0 3.2 11.8 8.7 -1.9 2.2 3.6 3.2 3.2 3.1
Outward direct investment -14.1 -11.8 -40.0 -32.9 -4.8 -4.2 -4.4 -4.6 -4.9 -5.1
Net foreign direct investment 11.6 -0.7 4.3 -1.7 -11.2 4.8 11.8 10.8 11.4 11.6
Stock of foreign direct investment 469.3 546.5 559.1 583.2 642.6 651.6 667.9 683.3 699.5 716.2
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 7,736 9,007 9,222 9,631 10,628 10,794 11,083 11,360 11,655 11,961
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 25.0 27.8 26.7 29.1 34.1 30.8 30.5 30.8 29.9 28.8
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.95 0.51 9.02 2.39 -0.50 0.64 1.09 1.00 1.01 1.00
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 1.67 1.82 1.75 1.70 1.92 1.78 1.72 1.69 1.66 1.64
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data are for historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is The Economist Intelligence Unit
Global data US and OECD growth: OECD
World trade growth: Economist Intelligence Unit aggregate
US and OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent average import price
US$ commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
EUR 3-month interbank rate: Eurostat; Deutsche Bundesbank
Domestic data GDP growth and components: INSEE, Comptes et indicateurs économiques; Informations rapides, série F
Consumer prices: ECB; INSEE, Eurostat
Average hourly earnings in manufacturing: OECD, Main Economic Indicators
Fiscal data: Eurostat
Banking data: IMF; Banque de France; Eurostat
Labour market data: OECD; INSEE; IMF
Exchange rates: IMF, ECB, Eurostat
External trade: IMF, IFS; Ministry of the Economy, INSEE, Eurostat
Population: UN; Eurostat
Foreign direct investment: IMF, IFS
Abbreviations ECB: European Central Bank
IFS: International Financial Statistics
IMF: International Monetary Fund
INSEE: Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows The Economist Intelligence Unit to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by The Economist Intelligence Unit for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2016-20) and from Economist Intelligence Unit assessments for the forecast period (2021-25). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by The Economist Intelligence Unit for 2016-20. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2021-25 are based on Economist Intelligence Unit assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; The Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2016-20 ranges are then used to derive 2021-25 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2021-25, not to the likely situation in 2025 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2018 or 2023). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2016-20   2021-25  
  Italy Regional average a Italy Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 5 4.6 5 4.7
  2. Risk of social unrest 3 4.1 3 3.9
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 5 4.8 5 4.8
  4. Government and opposition 3 4.2 3 4.1
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 4 4.1 4 3.9
  6. International disputes or tensions 4 3.9 4 3.8
  7. Government policy towards business 3 3.9 3 3.8
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 2 3.6 2 3.4
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 3 3.7 3 3.8
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 3 3.9 3 4.0
 11. Efficiency of legal system 2 3.9 2 3.9
 12. Corruption 3 3.9 3 4.1
 13. Impact of crime 2 4.1 3 4.2
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 5 4.9 5 4.9
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 3 4.0 2 3.6
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 1 2.7 1 2.7
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 5 4.5 5 4.2
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 5 4.4 5 4.4
  6. Quality of policymaking 3 3.7 4 4.1
  7. Institutional underpinnings 4 4.6 4 4.6
  8. Asset prices 2 2.3 3 2.3
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 5 4.0 5 4.1
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 5 4.9 5 4.9
  3. Real GDP growth* 1 1.6 3 3.1
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 5 3.7 5 3.8
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 1 1.3 2 2.4
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 1 1.3 3 2.6
  7. The natural resource endowment* 5 3.3 5 3.3
  8. Profitability* 1 1.8 3 3.3
  9. Regional integration 5 4.8 5 4.7
 10. Proximity to markets 5 4.7 4 4.2
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 4 4.7 4 4.8
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 3 3.8 3 4.0
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 3 3.9 3 4.0
  4. Promotion of competition 3 3.7 3 3.7
  5. Protection of intellectual property 4 4.5 4 4.6
  6. Price controls 4 4.1 4 4.1
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 2 3.3 2 3.4
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 3 3.7 3 3.6
  9. Minority shareholders 2 4.2 3 4.2
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 3 4.2 3 3.5
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 4 3.8 3 3.8
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 5 4.8 5 4.9
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 3 4.6 4 4.6
  5. Government favouritism 3 3.9 2 3.3
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 5 4.8 5 4.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 5 4.4 4 4.1
  3. Ease of trading* 3 4.6 5 4.6
  4. Openness of trade* 4 4.3 4 4.3
  5. Restrictions on the current account 5 4.9 5 4.9
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 3 4.3 5 4.7
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 3 2.7 3 2.9
  3. Value-added tax* 2 2.4 2 2.3
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 1 2.8 1 2.8
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 3 3.6 4 3.9
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 3 3.8 3 3.8
  7. Tax complexity 2 3.4 2 3.4
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 2 2.9 4 3.3
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 4 4.5 4 4.6
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 5 4.0 5 4.2
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 3 3.4 4 4.0
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 4 4.3 4 4.4
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 3 3.4 3 3.7
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 2 2.4 2 2.4
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 4 4.5 4 4.6
  3. Quality of workforce* 3 3.9 3 4.0
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 3 4.3 3 4.4
  5. Health of the workforce* 5 4.9 5 4.9
  6. Level of technical skills 4 4.2 4 4.1
  7. Cost of living* 4 3.1 4 3.1
  8. Incidence of strikes* 3 3.7 3 3.8
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 2 3.2 2 3.4
 10. Extent of wage regulation 3 3.4 3 3.3
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 4 3.8 4 3.7
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 5 4.2 5 4.6
  2. Broadband connection speed* 4 4.5 4 4.6
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 4 4.3 4 4.4
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 4 4.6 4 4.6
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 3 3.8 4 3.8
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 3 4.2 3 4.3
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 4 4.4 4 4.6
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 3 4.2 4 4.4
  9. Rents of office space* 1 1.8 1 1.6
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 5 4.3 5 4.2
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 4 4.7 5 4.8
  3. Scope of e-government* 4 4.2 5 4.6
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 3 4.4 4 4.1
  5. Internet use* 3 4.4 4 4.9
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 4 2.3 3 2.5
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 4 4.3 4 4.6
  8. Research infrastructure* 3 4.4 3 4.3
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the UK.

Subject: Tax rates; Local elections; Macroeconomics; Foreign exchange rates; Labor force; Politics; Economic activity; Productivity; Consumption; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Taxation; Election results; Population growth; Economic reform; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Central banks; Economic growth; Tax reform; Parliaments; Economic forecasts

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Macroeconomics Foreign exchange rates Labor force Economic activity Productivity Consumption International trade Purchasing power parity Taxation Economic reform Gross Domestic Product--GDP Central banks Economic growth Tax reform Economic forecasts; Industry: 52111 :‎ Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Location: Italy; Western Europe

People: Draghi, Mario

Company / organization: Name: European Central Bank; NAICS: 521110

Classification: 52111: Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Identifier / keyword: Italy; Western Europe

Title: Country Forecast Italy August 2021

Publication title: Country Forecast. Italy; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09668845

e-ISSN: 20489439

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611014437

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-italy-august-2021/docview/2611014437/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Turkey August 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-turkey-august-2021/docview/2628028754/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Turkey&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Turkey+August+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-17&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Turkey&amp;rft.issn=02695464&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Turkey; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Turkey; Middle East

Title: Country Report Turkey August 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Turkey; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695464

e-ISSN: 20475977

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2628028754

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-turkey-august-2021/docview/2628028754/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-02-13

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Thailand August 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-thailand-august-2021/docview/2611014176/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: [...]Prayuth will probably see out his four-year term, due to end in 2023, bar an extended Covid-19 emergency or a sustained economic crisis. Economic outlook 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Real GDP growth (%) -6.2 1.5 3.2 4.5 3.0 2.8 Consumer price inflation (av, %) -0.8 1.3 1.7 1.4 0.8 0.7 Budget balance (% of GDP) -6.7 -6.5 -5.9 -4.2 -3.8 -3.5 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.5 3.0 5.4 7.7 6.4 6.3 3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 0.6 0.5 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.6 Exchange rate Bt:US$ (av) 31.3 31.7 31.2 30.7 30.8 31.0 We expect Thailand's real GDP to expand by about 3% per year on average in 2021-25. Demographic outlook Population (m) 2015 2020 2025 Total 68.7 69.8 70.3 Male 33.6 34.0 34.1 Female 35.2 35.8 36.2 Period averages (%) 2016-20 2021-25 Population growth 0.3 0.2 Working-age population growth 0.0 -0.5 Labour force growth -0.3 -0.4 The rate of population growth will slow in the forecast period as a result of effective family-planning programmes and changing social norms, such as later marriage and smaller families. Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 69.8 Population growth 0.2 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 501.3 Real GDP growth 0.8 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 1,271.7b Real domestic demand growth 2.6 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 7,182 Inflation 0.3 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 18,219b Current-account balance (% of GDP) 7.3 Exchange rate (av) Bt:US$ 31.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.0 a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Thailand&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Thailand+August+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-16&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Thailand&amp;rft.issn=09668624&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - The military-aligned Phalang Pracharat (PP) will continue to lead the government under the prime minister and former coup leader, Prayuth Chan-ocha. The military's overarching influence will be ensured by the constitution drafted by the junta in 2016-17. As a result, Prayuth will probably see out his four-year term, due to end in 2023, bar an extended Covid-19 emergency or a sustained economic crisis. PP is well placed to hold a narrow majority coalition after the next election. However, a significant and increasingly vocal anti-military opposition outside of parliament will capitalise on any missteps of Prayuth's government. This means that serious challenges to the government, particularly later in the forecast period, cannot be ruled out.

Thailand--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.54 6.79 37 43 9 9
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.

- Thailand's business environment score improves in 2021-25. However, significantly faster progress elsewhere means that its global ranking has fallen by six places to 43rd, from 37th in 2016-20. Its regional position remains at ninth out of 17 countries. The higher overall score reflects minor improvement in a number of sub-categories. Thailand's score in foreign investment policy will improve as the government rolls out incentives to attract much-needed foreign investors. Likewise, The Economist Intelligence Unit expects an improvement in the market opportunities category as household income and thus domestic demand resume a steady growth trajectory after 2021. An anticipated expedition of infrastructure projects, including in digital and 5G, will boost Thailand's scores in the infrastructure and technological readiness categories. Such projects will be core parts of the government's agenda for job creation and recovery.

Thailand--highlights: Economic outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Real GDP growth (%) -6.2 1.5 3.2 4.5 3.0 2.8
Consumer price inflation (av, %) -0.8 1.3 1.7 1.4 0.8 0.7
Budget balance (% of GDP) -6.7 -6.5 -5.9 -4.2 -3.8 -3.5
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.5 3.0 5.4 7.7 6.4 6.3
3-month Treasury rate (av; %) 0.6 0.5 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.6
Exchange rate Bt:US$ (av) 31.3 31.7 31.2 30.7 30.8 31.0

- We expect Thailand's real GDP to expand by about 3% per year on average in 2021-25. The post-pandemic rebound will only be fully realised in 2023 amid the emergence of more infectious coronavirus strains. The continuous economic fallout means that the growth rate will remain slower than in pre-pandemic times. It will take until early 2023 for the economy to recover to its pre-pandemic level of output. Growth will rely more heavily on public investment in infra-structure development as household spending falls. The tourism sector will return to pre-pandemic levels only in 2024, as travel restrictions will remain during the early parts of the forecast period.

Thailand--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2015 2020 2025
Total 68.7 69.8 70.3
 Male 33.6 34.0 34.1
 Female 35.2 35.8 36.2
Period averages (%)   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth   0.3 0.2
Working-age population growth   0.0 -0.5
Labour force growth   -0.3 -0.4

- The rate of population growth will slow in the forecast period as a result of effective family-planning programmes and changing social norms, such as later marriage and smaller families. Improvement in the prevention and treatment of infectious disease will contribute to a longer life expectancy and an ageing population; this will put a burden on healthcare provision. Migrant labour from Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos will grow in absolute terms after a slump in 2021-22 amid pandemic-related travel restrictions. They will play a more prominent role in Thailand's labour market during the latter part of the forecast period as the trend of a declining domestic workforce persists amid a marked increase in the elderly population compared with its peers.

Thailand--highlights: Market opportunities   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 501.3 508.9 543.0 589.7 606.9 623.4
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 7,182 7,276 7,748 8,403 8,637 8,864
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 269.6 272.8 298.2 316.8 328.1 337.7
Household consumption (US$ bn) 265.5 267.9 283.1 300.9 312.0 321.4
Household consumption per head (US$) 3,800 3,830 4,040 4,290 4,440 4,570

- Thailand is a sizeable market, with a population of nearly 70m and nominal GDP equivalent to US$501.3bn (at market exchange rates) in 2020. As with the broader economy, the retail sector will stagnate in 2021 as recovery stutters amid the ongoing pandemic. In the latter part of the forecast period, the sector will create more market opportunities, following a rebound in domestic spending and rising tourist arrivals. Household debt will continue to dampen consumer sentiment in the forecast period. The continued rise of e-commerce and digital payments will irrevocably change consumers' habits and create new winners at the expense of traditional bricks-and-mortar stores.

Thailand--highlights: Long-term outlook   2019-30 2031-50 2019-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 2.6 2.2 2.3
Growth of real GDP 2.7 1.8 2.1
Labour productivity growth 2.9 2.9 2.9

- Thailand's long-term outlook hinges on the assumption that governments in the next ten years will prove capable of enacting structural reforms and upgrading infrastructure. There will be persistent challenges owing to an inefficient bureaucracy, political deadlock and a tourism-oriented economy. Without such reforms, Thailand's growth will consistently fall well below its potential and lag behind regional neighbours. In later decades, Thailand's unfavourable demographic profile and the impact of climate change will also affect GDP growth and political stability.

Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 69.8 Population growth 0.2
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 501.3 Real GDP growth 0.8
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 1,271.7 b Real domestic demand growth 2.6
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 7,182 Inflation 0.3
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 18,219 b Current-account balance (% of GDP) 7.3
Exchange rate (av) Bt:US$ 31.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 1.0
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Background: Following a revolution in 1932, Thailand's absolute monarchy was replaced with a constitutional monarchy. Although the elected government gained prominence, democracy was turbulent and has subsequently been subject to 19 coups. The latest took place in 2014, when the democratically elected government, led by Yingluck Shinawatra, was removed following months of political turmoil. Yingluck's older brother, Thaksin Shinawatra, had also been elected prime minister, before his removal in a coup in 2006. Although the divide between the poor rural population in the northern and southern provinces and the urban rich of Bangkok (the capital) will still last following a return to a limited form of democracy from 2019 led by military-aligned parties, a new force within the opposition-made up of cosmopolitan and liberal students-will further complicate the political landscape.
Political structure: Following the recent transition from junta administration to nominally civilian government, parliament takes the form of a 750-seat National Assembly, consisting of an elected 500-seat House of Representatives (the lower house) and a 250-seat Senate (the upper house) appointed by the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO). The prime minister is appointed by the National Assembly, and the king, Maha Vajiralongkorn, remains the symbolic head of state.
Policy issues: The military-aligned government will prioritise protecting people's livelihoods and will adopt measures aimed at reviving the economy in the short term. After the pandemic, it will return to its focus on improving the investment environment in Thailand, which will include an acceleration of a planned infrastructure upgrade, in an effort to facilitate the country's economic breakthrough in the long term. This emphasis on long-term policy continuity should reassure many foreign investors deterred by potential political instability, but growing regional competition will detract from Thailand's attractiveness as an investment destination.
Taxation: Corporate income tax stands at 20%. Tax concessions are available for firms that list on the stockmarket. Value-added tax (VAT) stands at 7%. Personal income tax rises to 35% on annual taxable earnings exceeding Bt5m (US$150,000). However, amid the pandemic, the government has waived and deferred payments of taxes for fiscal year 2020/21 (October 1st-September 30th).
Foreign trade: Thailand recorded a merchandise trade surplus (fob-fob) of US$40.9bn in 2020, up from US$26.7bn in 2019. However, a rare deficit in the services account shrank the current-account surplus to its smallest in five years, at US$17.6bn, in 2020, down from US$38.2bn in 2019.
Major exports 2020 % of total Major imports 2020 % of total
Machinery 42.9 Machinery 35.4
Food 12.7 Manufactured goods 17.4
Manufactured goods 12.9 Minerals, fuels & lubricants 15.3
Chemicals 9.9 Chemicals 10.7
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
US 12.8 China 21.2
China 11.9 Japan 14.0
Japan 10.0 US 7.3
Hong Kong 4.8 Malaysia 5.4
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance A military-aligned civilian government assumed power in July 2019, following the national legislative election held in March. The government consists of an 18-party coalition led by the Phalang Pracharat (PP) party, with a former general and coup leader, Prayuth Chan-ocha, as prime minister. Following the turbulent events surrounding the dissolution of the second-largest opposition party, Future Forward Party (FFP), in February 2020 and subsequent defections, the coalition has cemented its hold on power, which has remained intact despite an anti-military opposition movement. Prior to the 2019 election, the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO, the military junta) had ruled Thailand since the coup of 2014 and the military continues to exercise substantial political influence through a constitution drafted by its members in 2016-17. The legislature comprises a 250-seat Senate (upper house) appointed by the military and endorsed by the king, and a 500-seat House of Representatives (lower house) elected democratically. These features will incline future governments to be aligned with the junta's preferences. Nonetheless, the military's power is not entirely unchecked, made evident by the fact that PP governs in a fractious coalition with a long tradition of infighting. The lower house also includes a sizeable anti-junta opposition (led by Puea Thai, the party of two former prime ministers-and siblings-Yingluck and Thaksin Shinawatra, and the Move Forward Party, which is a continuation of the now-disbanded FFP).
King Maha Vajiralongkorn Bodindradebayavarangkun, who was formally crowned in May 2019, will oversee stability in the monarchy. Although the king will remain removed from day-to-day politics, he will adopt a more centralised style of leadership than that of his revered late father. Throughout the forecast period, the military will continue to look to (and defend) the monarchy to legitimise its own political role as the mutually beneficial royalist-military alliance, which has dominated the country's politics since the coup in 2014, endures. Nonetheless, the king's prominent place in Thai society will diminish in the medium term, as the new monarch-stung further by criticism about his performance during the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic-fails to command the same level of reverence among the public that his father did.
Composition of the House of Representatives (lower house), August 2021
  No of seats % of seats
Puea Thai 134 26.8
Phalang Pracharat a 122 24.4
Bhum Jai Thai 61 12.2
Move Forward Party 53 10.6
Democrat Party 51 10.2
Others 68 13.6
Vacant 11 2.2
Total 500 100.0
a The government is an 18-party coalition led by the Phalang Pracharat.
Source: Election Commission of Thailand.
Political outlook: Political stability The Economist Intelligence Unit believes that the military will retain dominant political influence in the forecast period (2021-25). Prayuth, a former junta leader and head of PP, will serve out his four-year term as prime minister, ending in 2023. The military also appoints the Senate (the upper house of parliament).
We do not expect on-and-off student-led protests-which began in June 2020 but have since dwindled-to lead to the removal of Prayuth's government or to result in democratic reform that will loosen the royalist and military's tight grip on power. The initial protests centred on three demands: the dissolution of parliament; an end to the harassment of critics of the government; and constitutional amendments. At their peak, the protests attracted a regular turnout of tens of thousands of mostly young people. The demonstrations ebbed partly because of their failure to broaden their mass appeal, made evident by the rise of the radical but less popular demands to reform the monarchy.
However, growing disquiet, even among some of the government's traditional supporters, over the handling of a third local wave of the Covid-19 pandemic and the vaccination rollout has gradually re-energised the movement. (The government's response to previous waves in 2020 had been relatively effective.) Throughout August 2021, activists staged multiple rallies, attracting thousands of people and marking a return of regular protests for the first time in months. With the economic fallout of the pandemic set to endure, further anti-govern-ment demonstrations are likely, even though the military's hold on power will remain secure.
Against this backdrop, the government will continue to pursue protest leaders and anti-government critics through legal crackdowns (including the application of the draconian lese-majesty law) and quick clearance operations. Considering the military's behavioural pattern, there will always be a distinct downside risk of violent suppression should protests regain significant momentum, as well as more radical action by activists. However, these remain outside our core forecast.
In terms of day-to-day governance, stability will be maintained largely because of the continued participation of most opposition parties. An emergency decree in response to the pandemic that has been in force since March 2020 (with no end in sight) will cement Prayuth's position for the foreseeable future, enabling him to exercise sweeping unilateral powers until at least the end of the pandemic. Nonetheless, there is a risk that anti-military parties will eventually boycott formal politics towards the end of Prayuth's term, in protest at the army's continued marginalisation of the opposition. The risk of such a boycott materialising sooner will rise if the street movement swells again.
King Maha Vajiralongkorn, on the throne since 2016, will prove less effective as a stabilising influence than his widely revered father. Regardless of the king's personal standing, which has been damaged by extended absences from Thailand during the coronavirus crisis, the military establishment still depends on royal endorsement for its political legitimacy and will continue to suppress criticism of the monarch. However, the protests, although not posing an acute threat at the moment, have broken the taboo on public criticism of the monarchy. The king's eroded standing will, over time, undermine the military's claim to be a guarantor of the country's constitutional order.
The insurgency in the Muslim-dominated southern provinces of Yala, Pattani and Narathiwat will continue. It will comprise small-scale attacks on the security forces and, occasionally, on religious sites frequented by civilians. Talks facilitated by Malaysia are unlikely to provide a definitive end to hostilities, as Thailand will not accede to the rebels' demands for self-rule. However, the insurgency presents only a minimal threat to overall political stability, as it is unlikely to spread.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness The outlook for political and institutional effectiveness will be underpinned by policy continuity under the military-aligned government, which is acting under the auspices of the junta-drafted constitution of 2016-17. In particular, PP's ability to pass and implement legislation will be supported by the constitutionally mandated 20-year "National Strategy"-a blueprint for develop-ment devised by the junta. In 2021-22 the government will continue to possess expanded unilateral executive and legislative power through the emergency decree issued in 2020 in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. Prayuth's hand will also be strengthened by the fact that he now enjoys a significantly larger majority in the lower house, following a series of defections from the opposition in 2020. Nonetheless, frequent disputes and factional struggles within the coalition on issues outside the National Strategy could return to stall major policies after the end of the pandemic-related emergency decree in the latter part of our forecast period, made evident by the delayed passage of the 2020 budget.
Significant threats to government effectiveness will also arise from the vocal opposition, especially from the resilient street protests that have vehemently decried the military's continued grip on power. The anticipated alleviation of a protracted public health and related economic crisis in 2022 will lead to a return to more intense political confrontation as pent-up grievances among the opposition re-emerge. Such grievances will focus largely on the government's handling of the pandemic and issues around an economy mired in a long and uncertain road to recovery. This will lead to instances of legislative gridlock and stymied policymaking. Later in the forecast period, a potential boycott of parliament, coinciding with the aforementioned street protests, could impede the government's ability to enact new legislation.
Nonetheless, PP, during the pandemic and in the run-up to the election in 2023, will devote significant resources to populist policies, to appease interest groups such as farmers and tourist operators, while simultaneously pursuing a pro-business push. The junta has made little progress in reconciling the longstanding political differences between the rural population of the north (who supported Thaksin) and the elite in southern Thailand (who are repre-sented by his detractors, the current establishment) as well as the newly emerging voices from metropolitan youths for liberal democracy. The military-aligned government will consequently continue to find it difficult to satisfy the three major camps and may face rising opposition from multiple fronts in the medium term.
Corruption will remain a significant problem in many of Thailand's institutions, including the military and state-owned companies. Cases under the government involving unelected officials, particularly those with explicit military and royalist links, may serve as a flashpoint for discontent over the constitutional system and its lack of accountability. This is also true of companies owned by the monarchy, which play an important but opaque role in the economy, including the local manufacturing of Covid-19 vaccines. If open discontent does materialise, it is more likely to be the cumulative point of a series of incidents and, therefore, to occur later in the forecast period. Although the administration will make efforts to show a tougher stance against corruption, for instance by encouraging use of a dedicated court, these measures will be pursued selectively in accordance with political influence. Given the slow progress of similar initiatives under previous military-aligned governments, there is little reason to believe that the current and future admini-stration will be any more successful in clamping down on corrupt activities.
Political outlook: Election watch The next general election is scheduled for 2023, and the military-aligned bloc will remain the slight favourite, owing to the tilted political landscape and expected economic recovery in 2022-23. A national election for the 500-seat House of Representatives (the lower house) was held in March 2019. The military-aligned PP then forged an alliance with 18 other parties to secure 254 seats and a wafer-thin majority in the chamber, thereby allowing the appointment of Prayuth as prime minister. Its position has solidified since then; it now commands support from more than 270 members of parliament (MPs), owing partly to the defection and disqualification of former opposition members from the banned Future Forward Party (FFP). The departure of several senior PP members in July 2020, after their faction lost the party chair to a confidant of Prayuth, has not threatened the prime minister's enhanced parliamentary majority.
Political outlook: International relations The partial return to democracy in 2019 has created more favourable circumstances for deepening ties with Western governments compared with the junta era. These will include the resumption of talks on an EU-Thailand free-trade agreement (FTA) post-pandemic, as well as more frequent high-profile visits (after the pandemic) by Western leaders. Meanwhile, Japan will pursue negotiations on a bilateral trade agreement amid concern that its economic footprint in Thailand may be reduced by rising Chinese investment.
Nevertheless, China's influence in Thailand will remain strong. With the countries having no conflicting territorial claims in the South China Sea and a shared hardline stance against liberal opposition, economic ties are set to strengthen further as Thailand focuses on attracting Chinese medical aids and investment under two flagship initiatives: "Thailand 4.0" and the Eastern Economic Corridor (EEC), a large special economic zone south-east of the Thai capital, Bangkok. Contractual and financial issues will continue to delay the implementation of some of the more costly and longer-term projects under these initiatives.
Increasing bilateral co-operation with China will be accompanied by Thailand's ongoing efforts to engage with fellow member states of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) on economic integration, which will include a push for the quick implementation of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) trade agreement in 2022.
On the issue of Myanmar, Thailand's leadership will remain reluctant to act against the junta given its own military origins. Inflows of Burmese citizens over the Thai border will rise markedly, but will not be large enough to destabilise the country or the wider region; however, Thailand would bear the brunt of a refugee crisis should the situation in Myanmar spiral out of control, although this remains outside our core forecasts.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
Overall position 6.54 6.79 37 43 9 9
Political environment 5.3 5.3 49 52 9 11
 Political stability 5.9 5.1 51 60 10 14
 Political effectiveness 4.9 5.5 43 44 9 9
Macroeconomic environment 7.5 7.5 27 24 9 6
Market opportunities 5.2 6.7 38 25 11 9
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 6.5 6.3 31 39 8 8
Policy towards foreign investment 6.4 6.9 48 35 9 7
Foreign trade & exchange controls 8.7 8.2 28 37 5 6
Taxes 7.9 7.8 11 18 5 7
Financing 7.0 7.0 24 27 8 8
The labour market 6.6 6.5 23 34 8 9
Infrastructure 5.0 5.8 50 54 9 10
Technological readiness 5.8 6.9 49 39 10 10
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Thailand's macroeconomic environment will remain stable in The Economist Intelligence Unit's forecast period, as the country begins to recover from the Covid-19 pandemic, the fallout of which will be visible during much of the forecast period. The manufacturing sector will recover earlier than the tourism sector, which will recover only slightly in 2021 owing to renewed waves of the pandemic and slow domestic vaccine roll-out. An improvement in the scores of market opportunities and technological readiness is noteworthy and bodes well for the country's medium-term attractiveness and prospect for digital-isation of businesses. An improvement in the scores for infrastructure and policy towards foreign investment will encourage a moderate rise in investment in the medium term. Some relocation of supply chains to Thailand, amid persistent China-US tensions, will also provide a modest boost to manufacturing activity in the latter part of the forecast period. This will be aided by an open capital account and a relatively stable currency. The "Thailand 4.0" initiative, which entails an ambitious infrastructure upgrade, will proceed, but face growing challenges during the forecast period as future construction projects to stimulate economic growth will be constrained by tighter fiscal space post-pandemic. Lacklustre domestic demand will remain a major drag on business sentiment, with high household debt weighing on private consumption prospects, especially in the aftermath of the pandemic.
The BOT will continue to support the long post-pandemic recovery in 2022 The Bank of Thailand (BOT, the central bank) will remain independent. Its governor, Sethaput Suthiwart-Narueput, who took office in October 2020, will continue to work with the government to help to revive the economy after a deep recession. This will entail the maintenance of a loose monetary policy in the early parts of the forecast period and a targeted approach to assist distressed debtors and sectors that are hardest hit by the pandemic.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Thailand's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2021-22: The authorities put off management reform and provide substantive financial support for state-owned enterprises.
2023-25: Thailand improves its domestic intellectual property rights (IPR) enforcement regime, which leads to the country's removal from the US Trade Representative's IPR watchlist.
Policy towards foreign investment 2021-22: The Bank of Thailand (BOT, the central bank) relaxes rules-on a short-term basis-on inflows into the country's financial markets, as it seeks a speedy recovery from the pandemic-induced recession.
2023-25: Opposition to the sale of assets to foreigners persists, particularly in the utilities sector. The authorities introduce new incentives to promote inward investment in targeted industries while removing those in low-value-added sectors.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2021-22: The country champions the quick implementation of the ratified Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)-an agreement to harmonise ASEAN's exisiting free-trade agreements (FTAs) within the regional bloc.
2023-25: Thailand completes negotiations with the EU on a free-trade zone and starts talks on joining the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP).
Taxes 2021-22: The authorities continue to implement one-off tax breaks and fee waivers for small and medium-sized enterprises.
2023-25: Employers' mandatory social-security payments rise from 3% to 5%. The government raises the rate of value-added tax (VAT) slightly from its current level of 7%.
Financing 2021-22: Access to financing becomes more favourable, mostly for domestic firms amid record-low interest rates. Concessionary financing for the small and medium-sized enterprises sector and selected debt holidays continue.
2023-25: As competition from foreign and digital banks heats up in the aftermath of the pandemic, the banking sector teams up with financial technology companies and expand their own digital service platform.
The labour market 2021-22: The government freezes the minimum wage following an incremental increase in 2020. The government supports reskilling of the labour force to reflect labour market trends created by the pandemic.
2023-25: Shortages of skilled labour become more acute, driving up costs in high-value-added industries. The law is relaxed to raise the labour participation rate among women and older workers.
Infrastructure 2021-22: The expansion of utilities, road and rail infrastructure progresses, providing a boost to the construction sector.
2023-25: Expansion work is completed at Don Muang and Suvarnabhumi international airports in the capital, Bangkok. Regional rail connectivity and smart city projects under the "Thailand 4.0" initiative accelerate,
Technological readiness 2021-22: The rollout of the 5G network expands as the government implements regulations related to data privacy, e-commerce and cyber security. Grassroots digital literacy initiatives advance, but access is still challenging for remote areas.
2023-25: The Board of Investment continues to prioritise investment approval for projects in the sectors targeted by the Thailand 4.0 industrial policy. The private sector champions the expansion of digitalisation of the economy.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.5 7.5 27 24 9 6
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Thailand's macroeconomic environment score is stable in the forecast period, from 2016-20. Both its global and regional rankings have improved owing to declines in the scores of peers. Generally effective and technocratic monetary and fiscal policy management are vital to the stability in Thailand's score, despite a deep recession in 2020, when real GDP declined by 6.2%. GDP growth will rebound only moderately, averaging 3% in 2021-25, compared with 1.6% in 2016-20. Economic growth will be below 2% in 2021, owing to prolonged pandemic-related restrictions on activities, which will keep private consump-tion and investment weak. Although merchandise exports will recover in line with strengthening external demand, the tourism sector's recovery will be delayed. Domestic demand will pick up sustainably only in the later part of the forecast period, and growing competition with peers in the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) will keep a lid on growth.
The economy will return to its pre-pandemic size only in 2023
- The military will maintain a strong grip on economic affairs in 2021-25, and oversee the approval of major spending plans to stimulate the economy back to growth. The constitutionally mandated "National Strategy" (2018-37), the junta's 20--year blueprint for development, will undergo changes after an ongoing review by the government's National Economic and Social Development Council, with a stronger emphasis on generating tangible results in terms of job creation and GDP growth in the short term and strengthening the grassroot economy in the longer term. This will include an expedition of infrastructure projects and renewed commitments on the agriculture sector, where Thailand has traditionally been competitive, and the health sector. Strategy for the tourism sector will be tweaked in the light of uncertainty brought about by the Covid-19 pandemic, but the sector will remain significant overall. The main objective of avoiding the middle-income trap will stay. The government will also ensure that business-oriented tax reform and investment incentives are maintained and expanded in 2021-25, and that major infrastructure investment projects continue beyond this period. In the early part of the forecast period, a prolonged slump in tourism and intermittent lockdown measures to contain the pandemic will weigh down the recovery. Nonetheless, broad economic stability will be ensured by sound macroeconomic fundamentals, including a still-healthy current-account surplus and manageable levels of public debt. This will be helped by a recovery in growth in 2022-25, as global economic conditions normalise.
- The central bank under the governor, Sethaput Suthiwart-Narueput, will uphold traditional credibility as it remains relatively free from political pressure in setting policy rates and managing excess volatility in the local currency, the baht. It will balance the objectives of supporting economic recovery while preserving financial stability, which aligns with the economic agenda of the prime minister, Prayuth Chan-ocha.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.5 6.3 31 39 8 8
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
The score for policy towards private enterprise and competition drops slightly in 2021-25 as the government prioritises saving state-owned and large corporations with connections to powerful officials. Thailand's global ranking falls from 31st in 2016-20 to 39th in 2021-25. However, the country's regional ranking will remain unchanged owing to concurrent declines in other Asian countries. Corruption and favouritism will continue to distort free-market dynamics, made evident by the slow progress of cases, despite the media attention that the National Anti-Corruption Commission (NACC) has received in recent years. Big business groups with ties to the political elite retain a disproportionate influence on commercial affairs. Individuals with ties to military and political leaders tend to extract concessions from government and influence legal outcomes. Against this backdrop, the return to a quasi-civilian regime since the March 2019 election will not lead to any significant improvement in government accountability.
The pace of privatisation of SOEs will slow further in 2021-25
- Reforms to bolster the operational efficiency of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) have been proposed in recent years, but the prospect of their implementation has grown even more remote in the wake of the pandemic. Any such reform would redistribute economic rents away from current holders. Privatisation remains a sensitive issue among both powerful interests and the public. It is unlikely that the military-aligned government will sell off state assets, especially after those assets have received government bail-outs and will probably remain at discounted prices for the foreseeable future. The continuation of price controls will distort competition in Thailand, as the government will keep price controls for some basic goods to make them affordable; prices for goods on the "sensitive" list cannot be changed without the permission of the Ministry of Commerce.
- The reform of corporate governance at 56 SOEs, controlling assets worth more than US$300bn, will stall. Since the 2019 election, Prayuth's government has made no tangible attempt to kick-start such reform. As the political agenda will centre on post-pandemic recovery, complex and divisive longer-term initiatives that do not result in immediate gains will be put on the backburner. "Superboards", devised under the junta regime to address public-sector corruption and oversee reform, will remain prone to political influence. SOEs will continue to be favoured in the state's often opaque procurement processes, as the government is set to step up its investments to support the economy.

Intellectual property infringement will remain an issue in the medium term
- Thailand has been on the US Trade Representative's lower-priority Watch List for intellectual property (IP) since late 2017. Although the country continues to make minor progress on matters related to patents and copyright legislation in recent years, instances of IP infringement remain relatively frequent. This is due to a combination of legislative and enforcement issues, such as Thailand's absence from the World Intellectual Property Organisation's (WIPO) Copyright Treaty, a limited level of punitive measures and patent application backlogs. As the country seeks to reinvent itself as a "digital economy" under its Thailand 4.0 initiative post-pandemic, we expect improve-ments in the legal apparatus that will offer greater protection for patent holders during the latter part of the forecast period. However, as with many emerging economies, enforcement will remain flawed.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.4 6.9 48 35 9 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
The score for policy towards foreign investment improves in 2021-25, raising both the country's regional and global rankings. Thailand will continue to encourage inward investment, especially in higher-value-added industries, as part of the Thailand 4.0 industrial policy. Further incentives are likely to be rolled out amid the ongoing pandemic in 2021-22, and the Board of Investment (BOI) will continue to fast-track investment approvals. The government is keenly aware of intense competition for foreign investment and will prioritise improving the country's attractiveness. It will also decline to revive proposals to amend the Foreign Business Act, which would make it more difficult for foreign companies to control Thai entities unless they own a majority of shares.

- The BOI's investment promotion strategy for 2015-22 offers incentives and government support for foreign investors. The strategy's central tenet provides for offers of generous tax breaks, land rights and so-called smart visas for companies and entrepreneurs involved in high-technology industries that will contribute to enhancing Thailand's productivity through technical training or promotion of automation technology. Amid the pandemic, the country will expand the list of sectors eligible for such incentives, such as manufacturers of medical equipment and drugs. It also focuses on the development of special economic zones (SEZs) along the land borders of Thailand as part of the Eastern Economic Corridor. This is in place to take advantage of Thailand's increasing flows of international labour and goods via the country's seaports and aviation networks under the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC), which was formally established in 2015. These objectives dovetail with the longer-term Thailand 4.0 policy. Incentives are periodically reviewed and usually enhanced.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.7 8.2 28 37 5 6
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
The score for foreign trade and exchange controls falls in 2021-25, driven primarily by ongoing and expected pandemic-related travel restrictions. This causes Thailand's global ranking to drop to 37th, from 28th in 2016-20. The continued imposition of travel barriers will impede exchange of goods, especially crossborder trade in 2021-22. Thailand's reliance on international trade, as well as a collapse of external demand in 2020, will ensure that the government strives to maintain a favourable relationship with major export markets, beyond the necessary quarantine measures. Authorities will be more likely to accommodate the demands of influential domestic groups in 2022-23, with an approaching election and the expectation of a full recovery in its major export markets. The government will be keen to diversify export markets and continue to pursue trade agreements, both individually and in partnership with other ASEAN members. The Thai parliament approved the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) in February 2021 and will issue laws and regulations to complete the ratification process before end-2021.

- Meanwhile the country will adhere to its commitments as a member of the World Trade Organisation. Thailand has accepted the obligations laid down in the IMF's Article VIII, which stipulates that transactions on the current account should be free of restrictions. Foreign investors do not face restrictions on the repatriation of profits and dividends. The central bank has eased restrictions on outward capital flows, and temporary measures to control capital inflows imposed in 2019 and early 2020 will not remain in effect amid the ongoing pandemic as the country urgently seeks a return of foreign investors.
- Thailand's continual liberalisation of its trade regime, in line with its commitment to implementing the AEC, will slow in 2021-25. Although the AEC had already led to the lifting of most tariffs and freer movement of services, investment and skilled labour (in eight selected sectors) since end-2015, a commensurate increase of onerous customs regulations and non-tariff barriers (NTBs) from 2016 to 2020 continued to limit intra-regional trade. With the pandemic wreaking havoc on the fiscal and current accounts of ASEAN members, the use of such NTBs will rise further amid a shift to protecting domestic external sectors. This will have a particularly obvious impact on services trade, which has long been more vulnerable to such measures than are flows of goods. Expectations that the ASEAN Trade in Services Agreement (ATISA), in effect since October 2019, will lead to phenomenal growth of services trade in 2021-25 will be unlikely to materialise or, at best, be delayed to the later part of the forecast period. For instance, some of the subsectors that ATISA seeks to liberalise (such as healthcare) coincide with the strategic industries that are high on governments' protection lists.

Negotiation on an FTA with the EU and joining the CPTPP will proceed
- Formal talks on a bilateral free-trade agreement (FTA) between Thailand and the EU were put on hold after the 2014 coup, and there are encouraging signs that the talks could gain momentum in 2021-22; European and Thai businesses are both keen to conclude a deal. Barring a deterioration in Thailand's politics, a Thai-EU deal is likely to be concluded before the end of the forecast period. At the same time, Thailand will start negotiations to join the 11-strong Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), which counts Australia, Canada and Japan among its members.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.9 7.8 11 18 5 7
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Thailand's score in the taxes category declines marginally in 2021-25; the country's global and regional rankings drop to 18th and seventh place respectively. The minor drop in the score is due to the two-year-long delay in the implementation of the new, fairer property and land tax. Nonetheless, Thailand's tax regime remains relatively simple and changes have been made in recent years to reduce the overall burden on households and firms. The standard rate of corporate tax was reduced from 30% in 2011 to 20% in 2013. We expect it to remain at 20%, given the government's priority of attracting foreign investors. The personal income is also relatively favourable, with the top marginal rate standing at 35% for Thai and foreign workers with annual earnings of more than Bt5m (US$145,000). Wide-ranging waivers for value-added tax (VAT), corporate and income taxes were introduced amid the pandemic and have been gradually phased out, but targeted breaks and concessions to stimulate personal consumption will remain throughout 2021.
Relatively low taxes will remain a major incentive for investors
- Successive governments have repeatedly postponed returning the VAT rate from a reduced rate of 7% to 10%, as per the official law. Amid the pandemic, we expect this lower rate to remain in 2021-22. The authorities will raise the rate in 2023-24 as the need to plug the fiscal gap arising from a jump in expenditure in 2020-21 takes precedence. However, this decision will also be influenced by the prevailing political climate, as an increase in the VAT rate could serve as a catalyst for further protests. This means that the government will be unlikely to sanction a rise in 2022 owing to the proximity of the next election, which is due in early 2023.
- Coronavirus-related tax waivers will be in effect in the earlier part of the forecast period, as the military-aligned government will keep them in place to cushion the impact of the pandemic. This will include deferring the filing and payment of income and corporate tax for a year. For small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), as well as individuals, the government increased the allowance of tax deduction in 2020. The withholding tax rate will also fall to 1.5-2% on income received from April to December 2020. Withholding tax rate for goodwill, copyright and other rights in October 2020-December 2022 will also be reduced to 2%, if payment is made online.
- The government will be prepared to continue to run a large fiscal deficit in 2021-22 to finance the aforementioned measures. From 2023 onwards, the government will opt to curtail spending growth, rather than raise taxes, to reduce the fiscal deficit. As a longer-term initiative, the government will make efforts to expand revenue collection. These will include measures to enable digital and mobile payments to broaden the tax base, as well as the imposition of capital gains tax later in the forecast period. Meanwhile the aforementioned delayed tax on property and land will be implemented only in 2022. It will have only a minor impact on foreign business, with the tax rates most applicable to foreign investors likely to be set at less than 2%.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.0 7.0 24 27 8 8
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Thailand's score for financing remains stable in 2021-25, as the banking sector has remained resilient in the face of headwinds from the pandemic-induced recession. However, Thailand's global ranking for the category falls from 24th in 2016-20 to 27th, while its regional ranking remains at eighth. The ratio of non-performing loans (NPLs) to total loans remains relatively low, standing at 3.2% at end-March 2021. Although it has remained around this level since 2020, there are substantial risks of rising NPLs when support measures are withdrawn. This will negatively affect the banking sector's asset quality and profitability, although the systemic risk is mitigated by the sector's ample capital adequacy and liquidity.
The authorities will focus on containing pandemic risks on financial stability
- The BOT and the Ministry of Finance will continue to focus on containing risks from the pandemic fallout on the financial sector with a view to preserve financial stability. NPLs will remain a threat to profitability of banks during the early part of the forecast period, especially those with a portfolio of mostly SMEs and individuals. The ongoing negotiations on liberalising banking services under the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework will drag on amid the pandemic and only conclude towards the end of the forecast period. However, Thailand's other pursuit of increasing interoperability across ASEAN markets-via facilitating local currency settlement and standardised digitisation of payments-will progress faster. The bilateral agreement linking Thailand's PromptPay and Singapore's PayNow in the second quarter of 2021 was the first such regional digital payment in ASEAN. Thailand also reached an agreement with Malaysia and Vietnam on crossborder QR payments in 2021.
- The local bond market will continue to expand under the guidance of the BOT. The pandemic unsettled confidence in Thai corporate bonds in 2020, but sentiment has improved after the government introduced the corporate bond stabilisation fund. Thailand's strong macroeconomic fundamentals and credible central bank, with a reputation for prudence, has made it ASEAN's largest local-currency bond market. Although government bonds continue to dominate the market, at more than 80% of all bonds issued, debt-laden large and medium-sized companies are increasingly using the bond market to refinance their bank loans and offshore borrowings. Strengthening demand in this market will continue during the forecast period as capital flows into relatively safe assets.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.6 6.5 23 34 8 9
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
The deterioration in Thailand's global and regional rankings in the labour market category reflects its waning competitiveness. The country is a labour-scarce economy and the official unemployment rate remains consistently low, which continues to hold true even amid the pandemic. Labour market conditions will, in general, remain adequate in terms of supporting the operations of foreign-invested enterprises, but weaknesses-especially rising wage costs and skill shortages-will persist and exacerbate. Thailand's advantages as a cost-efficient base for labour-intensive production will quickly vanish amid growing competition from its low-income neighbours such as Cambodia and Vietnam, which also happen to boast a large workforce.
A poorly skilled workforce will remain the biggest hurdle for "Thailand 4.0"
- Shortages of labour trained to work in high-value industries will continue to pose a huge problem to the government's Thailand 4.0 policy ambitions, which are premised on developing the country's advanced technology sectors. These skilled labour problems stem in large part from Thailand's under-performing education system, which ranks poorly both globally and regionally. Educational reforms in the last two decades have been poorly and inconsistently implemented, and there are currently still no plans for a major overhaul of the system. The ability of the labour force to meet the needs of businesses (in terms of specialist skills) is therefore likely to remain below global standards. In view of this situation, hiring skilled foreign workers will become easier with the government set to relax visa restrictions, especially for the research and technology sectors during the forecast period. There is a sense of emergency to accelerate digital skills training among the labour force and students, but the skill upgrade process will take time to show results.
- From January 2017 the nationwide daily minimum-wage schedule was replaced by minimum wages per province. The range of the wage floor was raised to Bt313-336 (about US$10) with effect from January 2020. Further increases in the minimum wage will be frozen amid the pandemic and rising unemployment in 2021-22. Despite long-standing opposition in parliament and among business associations owing to the damage it would incur on private sector costs and Thailand's regional competitiveness, we expect the government to yet again succeed in raising the minimum wage in 2023-25 as a populist measure to appease the working class. The setting up of the National Pension Fund was approved by the cabinet in early 2021, but its implementation timeline is still uncertain.

Migrant workers will help to alleviate the problem of an ageing workforce
- Thailand is facing the social and economic consequences of a rapidly ageing society, including a steadily declining workforce as a share of the total population. Proposals advocating a staggered increase in the retirement age of civil servants-from 60 years to 63, with the option of delaying retirement in steps for up to ten years- have been postponed, but may still be implemented in the later part of the forecast period. The private sector has followed a more flexible rule on retirement age since a court ruling in 2017, which means that employees, depending on contractual clauses, have the option to exercise the right to retire at 60 or continue working.
- Migrant workers accounted for more than 10% of the total labour force prior to the pandemic, according to the UN. These workers typically come from neighbouring Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos, and fill low-skilled vacancies in industries such as agriculture, construction and domestic work. We expect the size of the local labour force to rise in Thailand post-pandemic, when they are allowed to return, with businesses set to become even more reliant on cheaper migrant workers. This will also be driven by the development of SEZs, which the government has opened in border areas to capitalise on the supply of low-cost migrant labour from neighbouring countries. As a result, tensions will inevitably rise between local and migrant workers on issues of mistreatment and locals' resentment of job losses to migrant labourers. International concern over potential human-rights abuses in Thailand, especially in the fishing industry, have resulted in stronger protective measures for migrant workers, but the UN still reports exploitation.

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
5.0 5.8 50 54 9 10
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
The country's infrastructure score improves for the next five years, but faster improvements by peers will lead to Thailand's lower rankings. Globally, it will fall from 50th to 54th, and regionally, from ninth to tenth in 2021-25. The military-aligned government will expedite medium-sized work projects while continuing to push for faster progress on long-pending "megaprojects", although the latter will still face occasional delays. The domestic rail network will benefit from the opening of Bang Sue Grand Station in the third quarter of 2021, which will become Thailand's new central rail station, connecting several rail networks, and also South-east Asia's largest rail station. After a long delay, a contract for the construction of high-speed railways linking Thailand's three airports has been signed, with a goal to start operating in 2024. However, improvements in telecommunications services have been slow. Although 4G coverage is widely available, average speeds remain slow by regional comparison. Improvements in utilities work on electricity, water supply and distribution, and gas pipes will continue. Electricity supplies have risen, but the potential for shortages remains. At present, more than 70% of the country's electricity is generated using natural gas, according to the Energy Policy and Plan-ning Office, making the country vulnerable to fluctuations in global gas prices.
Infrastructure will remain a key pillar of the government's plan for recovery
- The government has faced delays in the financing and implementation stages of its ambitious infrastructure development megaprojects, in particular on the regional rail network, owing to issues with land acquisition, environmental impact and commercial viability. This includes the construction of the much-vaunted Thai section of the high-speed railway linking Thailand and China, via Laos (which has started after long delays, but is still in early stages). Elsewhere, regional transport projects have faced similar delays owing to wrangling over financing with Chinese and Japanese investors. This partly reflects the government's efforts to take advantage of the ongoing competition for geopolitical influence between the two countries to secure the best deal. We expect these dynamics to result in uneven progress on priority projects in 2021-25. Thailand's more difficult financial position after the pandemic also means that the conditionality of loans and terms of repayment will feature more prominently in the government's decision to greenlight certain projects at the expense of others.
- A state-run management company, Airports of Thailand, experienced a dismal year in 2020, which has extended to 2021 and possibly part of 2022. Its finances have been hit hard by the pandemic, but the planned upgrade of the country's three major airports is still ongoing. The airport expansion in Bangkok (the capital) will still be completed by 2024. Expansion plans on the existing Chiang Mai and Phuket airports will be carried out during the forecast period to prepare for the revival of tourism post-Covid, but the construction of new airports in Chiang Mai and Phuket will probably only materialise beyond the end of the forecast period. The construction for U-Tapao airport's expansion in the Eastern Economic Corridor will also start in 2022 and become operational in the forecast period.

5G networks are a major part of the ambitious Thailand 4.0 initiative
- The pandemic has spurred development of 5G networks in Thailand, and the country now leads its ASEAN counterparts in the 5G race. Three operators have already launched 5G networks, providing such services to retail customers.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
5.8 6.9 49 39 10 10
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
Thailand's technological readiness score improves significantly in 2021-25, which boosts its global rankings to 39, from 49 in 2016-20. The change reflects our expectations that the government will increase its investments in research and development (R&D) and STEM education, and continue to improve digital infrastructure in 2021-25. To fulfil the government's Thailand 4.0 goals, it will scale up incentives for international companies to set up research bases inside the country. Although Thailand's number of internet users per 100 population increased to 60.2 in 2019, it remains less than that of Malaysia (81.2) and the Philippines (66). However, high smartphone usage still makes the country a ripe market for e-commerce and digital banking. As at June 2021 there were 72.6m mobile banking accounts in the country, which has a population of 70m.
Benefits of digitisation will stay mostly within urban areas
- The government has outlined plans to pursue digital infrastructure projects initiated by the junta as part of the Thailand 4.0 strategy and the 20-year digital roadmap. The Village Broadband Project (Net Pracharat) aims to bring national broadband to 25,000 remote communities, to develop rural areas and give private-sector enterprises access to public infrastructure. Progress on this front has been slow owing to cost issues and the poor quality of WiFi hotspots, but the pandemic has increased the sense of urgency to accelerate broadband access for rural villages so that residents are not left behind. A state telecoms company, TOT, has been blacklisted by the government following its failure to deliver broadband to these villages on time. As a result, any socioeconomic transformation to be brought about by 5G internet in the forecast period will still be limited to the big cities and their surrounding areas.
- The BOI will probably step up incentives, such as import duty exemptions on raw materials used in R&D, to expedite the development of innovative capacities in the private sector, which has long shown a lack of commercial acumen in deployment of technology. Companies focused on biotechnology, nanotechnology, advanced materials or digital technology are also eligible for up to 13 years' exemption from corporate income tax if they co-operate with public research institutions in R&D. Spurred by the pandemic, digitalisation efforts will increase in the private sector, and there will be more adoption of artificial intelligence, big data and quantum computing, especially among large companies with resources.

Economic forecast: Policy trends The ongoing third wave of coronavirus infections, owing partly to the spread of the more infectious Delta variant of the virus since April, will dominate the Thai government's agenda in 2021-22. Tighter restrictions are likely to remain in place until at least September, with limited operations at shopping centres and restaurants. A return to the full lockdown implemented in 2020 remains unlikely, but this risk has risen amid mounting discontent over the pandemic. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the ongoing mass vaccination drive, which started in early June, to reach much of the high-risk segment of the population by early 2022, as the local production and distribution of millions of Oxford University-AstraZeneca (UK) vaccine doses should become more widely available throughout the second half of 2021. Overall, we expect Thailand to have inoculated more than 60% of its population by the third quarter of 2022. The government will also unveil further stimulus measures amid a fragile economic recovery.
In time, the government will return to its longer-term pursuit of boosting the country's competitiveness. The ambitious Thailand 4.0 industrial policy will remain the economic blueprint for the country's transformation into a sophisticated manufacturing and technology hub. This will entail the provision of generous tax breaks and more accessible working visas for foreign investors and professionals in knowledge-intensive industries. However, Thailand's aspiration to become a high-technology economy will face obstacles-most notably the lack of skilled labour and fierce competition from better-positioned regional peers.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Government expenditure 21.5 21.7 21.4 20.3 20.5 20.5
Government revenue 14.8 15.2 15.5 16.1 16.8 17.0
Budget balance -6.7 -6.5 -5.9 -4.2 -3.8 -3.5
We expect the budget deficit to remain wide in 2021-22, at the equivalent of more than 6% of GDP, owing to the impact of the pandemic on tax revenue and government spending. We expect the government to unveil further rounds of stimulus throughout 2021-22. The government has unveiled packages worth about US$13bn since the start of 2021. Alongside the government's increased investment in infrastructure, these will contribute to the wide deficit in 2021. The government will finance the deficit this year through the issuance of new debt, made possible by the authorisation of borrowing of another US$16bn, mostly for domestic buyers, in addition to the Bt1trn (US$32.8bn) announced in mid-2020. We forecast that total public debt will breach the key threshold of 60% in 2022, surging from the equivalent of 41.2% of GDP in 2019.
Amid rising debt stock, concerns about fiscal sustainability will lead to a tightening fiscal stance from 2023. This will result in a more marked narrowing of the budget deficit in 2023-25. Increased infrastructure spending and investment will form the bulk of the rise in government expenditure after the pandemic, funded partly by steady economic growth. An increase in value-added tax in the latter part of the forecast period, from the current rate of 7%, will also bolster revenue.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Commercial banks' prime rate (av) 3.3 3.3 3.7 4.3 4.6 4.8
Short-term interest rate (year-end) 0.6 0.4 0.6 1.2 1.5 1.7
Money market interest rate (year-end) 0.6 0.5 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.6
Amid an increasingly uncertain recovery prospect due to the third wave of Covid-19 infections, we now expect the Bank of Thailand (BOT, the central bank) to make a further, one-off rate cut of 25 basis points towards the end of 2021, bringing the policy rate to a new record low of 0.25%. With the economy struggling to recover from the third wave and few other policy options, the BOT will probably have to resort to a last-ditch measure of reducing the rate to near zero. However, this will not translate into a substantial boost to real GDP, as the epidemiological trend will remain the chief determinant of Thailand's economic performance in 2021-22.
The BOT will sanction only gradual rate rises over a two-year cycle from early 2023, to about 1.5%, as domestic and external economic conditions strengthen. The central bank, which purchased Bt35bn (US$1.1bn) of govern-ment bonds in 2020, is likely to maintain its open-market operations, with the aim of supporting government financing.
The Bt400bn Corporate Bond Stabilisation Fund, established in April 2020, will continue to help to stabilise the financial system. Its purchase of private lenders' troubled assets will calm the market as the effects of surging non-performing loans and aggressive rate cuts become more evident throughout 2021, with the economic fallout of the pandemic stretching into a second year.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Economic growth (%)
US GDP -3.5 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.0
OECD GDP -4.8 4.9 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.0
World GDP -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
World trade -8.1 8.0 5.6 4.7 4.2 4.3
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
OECD CPI 1.2 2.8 2.2 2.0 2.0 2.1
Manufactures (measured in US$) 0.2 6.5 1.4 1.9 2.7 2.5
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 2.9 30.9 -2.3 0.1 -8.1 -0.1
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6
¥ 3-month money market rate (av; %) 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
¥:US$ (av) 106.8 108.7 110.6 112.1 113.1 111.9
Bt:US$ (av) 31.29 31.70 31.20 30.70 30.80 31.00
Economic forecast: Economic growth With recurring impositions of tighter restrictions likely, we have downgraded our forecast for real GDP growth to 1.5% in 2021. This represents a weak rebound from a deep contraction of 6.2% in 2020. Thailand's recovery prospects have dimmed amid the unabated spread of the Delta variant and a slow vaccination rollout. Although it is outside our central forecast, the economy could even struggle to grow in 2021 should a full national lockdown (similar to that in mid-2020) be reintroduced for a number of months in response to the ongoing third wave of the coronavirus.
We expect investment growth to be weak in 2021, at only 1.3%; companies will remain wary, given the volatile epidemiological situation, although developed economies have begun to reopen with relatively efficient vaccination programmes in place. Household expenditure will also post only a subpar recovery of 1% growth in 2021, despite continued relief measures, as the reimposition of quarantine measures and anxiety about the fallout from the new wave of infection dampens consumer spending throughout 2021. However, Thailand's exports of goods and services will remain a bright spot, growing by more than 11%, as the country's major goods export markets-especially China and the US-move on from the pandemic. Steady growth will return in the latter part of the forecast period, with the release of pent-up demand in 2023 marking a high point in Thailand's recovery.
The intensification of the pandemic in Thailand will severely curtail the effect of the government's ambitious plan to welcome vaccinated tourists from October 2021 (Phuket reopened on July 1st on a pilot scheme). Despite the progress of vaccination programmes in developed economies, we expect a modest recovery in the tourism sector to begin only in 2022, with global travel restrictions likely to remain in place until then. We forecast that tourism spend-ing in Thailand will not return to the pre-pandemic level of 2019 until 2024.
With US-China trade friction set to persist in the aftermath of the pandemic, Thai automotive exporters are likely to reap some benefits as multi-nationals diversify their regional supply chains. Concerns about Thailand's factor costs and research capability will prevent the country from capitalising more fully on such opportunities compared with regional peers such as Vietnam. This informs our expectation that the anticipated economic break-through will not materialise by 2025, which explains the relatively slow economic growth after 2022.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends On the supply side of the economy, we expect the industrial sector to grow at an annual average of 3.4% in 2021-25. The seemingly impressive headline figures mask the fact that industrial output will not return to pre-pandemic levels until 2022, owing to the deep contraction that it suffered in 2020. The coronavirus pandemic dealt a heavy blow to Thailand's export-oriented manufacturing sector, in particular the automotive industry. A weakening in global demand, which will not fully recover until the second half of 2022, will weigh on growth in the industrial sector in 2020-22. In the latter part of the forecast period, industrial production will resume steady growth amid increased public investment in infrastructure. Thailand will probably not benefit significantly from the relocation of supply chains away from China amid ongoing US-China trade tensions. This reflects concerns about the country's increasingly expensive labour and a relatively small pool of skilled workers compared with rapidly growing regional economies.
The services sector will be hit the hardest and longest by the pandemic The services sector will grow by an annual average of 2.8% in 2021-25. Tourism, which accounts for more than 70% of Thailand's services exports, will continue to remain largely dormant in 2021-22 following a historic decline in 2020, and not recover fully until at least 2024. We expect onerous global travel restrictions and quarantine measures to remain throughout 2021-22, which will halt inbound tourism. China, a traditionally important source of tourists, will continue to limit outbound tourism to Thailand until that country has achieved mass immunity through vaccination. However, in the longer term, Thailand will retain its attraction as a major global tourist destination.
Meanwhile the financial sector will remain relatively healthy. Although the ratio of non-performing loans (NPLs) to total loans is likely to surge amid the pandemic, the sector will be able to weather the storm with its adequate capitalisation and a competent central bank. However, household debt remains elevated, which will crimp demand and dampen the expansion of the sector as a whole in 2021-25. In the first quarter of 2021 household debt climbed to an 18-year high of 90.5% of GDP, from 84.9% as at end-2020. Elsewhere, the telecoms segment industry will see strong growth towards the end of the forecast period as the consumer electronics cycle recovers from its slump and the rollout of 5G networks is mostly completed. This will allow firms to meet surging demand for mobile internet services and will dovetail with the continued expansion of e-commerce platforms in the country.
The agriculture sector will remain vulnerable to extreme weather cycles, including droughts and floods. Productivity is also likely to suffer as tentative efforts to reform the sector are repeatedly set back by implementation issues and lack of government attention, which will also mean that producers are largely unable to raise productivity by employing more sophisticated techno-logies. Some industries, such as fishing, will struggle early in the forecast period as the industry adapts to Western countries' market-access requirements regarding labour rights. These weaknesses will ensure that farmers remain an important interest group for the new government. We expect the agriculture sector to grow by an annual average of 2.1% in 2021-25.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Consumer prices -0.8 1.3 1.7 1.4 0.8 0.7
Average wages 1.9 1.6 2.6 2.3 2.0 1.5
Real wages 2.8 0.3 0.9 0.9 1.2 0.8
Labour costs per hour (US$) 3.2 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.5 3.6
Although an anticipated increase in global food and energy prices will exert inflationary pressure on consumer prices throughout 2021, the continued volatility of the pandemic has led us to revise down our forecast for average inflation to 1.3% this year. Considering the low base of pandemic-hit 2020, this reflects tepid domestic demand amid an ongoing wave of the coronavirus.
As economic momentum returns in 2022, inflation will pick up to 1.7%. A subsequent slowdown following the spike in economic activity during the preceding years will then help to ease average annual inflation to 1% in 2023-25. Overall, this rate will remain well below those of Thailand's regional peers, mainly reflecting relatively modest growth in household consumption.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2 025
Exchange rate Bt:US$ (av) 31.3 31.7 31.2 30.7 30.8 3 1.0
Exchange rate Bt:US$ (end-period) 30.0 33.1 31.0 30.8 30.9 3 1.1
Exchange rate Bt:¥100 (av) 29.3 29.2 28.2 27.4 27.2 2 7.7
Real effective exchange-rate index (2010=100; av) 109.5 103.7 106.4 107.9 106.1 1 03.4
Purchasing power parity Bt:US$ (av) 12.3 12.3 12.3 12.3 12.1 1 1.9
Despite the ongoing wave of Covid-19, the local currency, the baht, will remain resilient against the US dollar in 2021, as the country's current-account surplus and foreign-exchange reserves remain robust. Aided partly by the relative weakness of the US dollar, any depreciation that the baht will experience in 2021-22 that results from the evolving domestic epidemiological situation should remain gradual and transient. This informs our forecast that the baht will stabilise at an exchange rate of about Bt33:US$1 at the end of 2021 despite its recent depreciation since mid-June.
The BOT will continue to intervene to slow the baht's appreciation. However, the risk of being labelled a currency manipulator by the US makes any excessive move by the central bank less likely. This will help to keep the currency at a relatively strong rate of about Bt31:US$1 in the latter part of the forecast period.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Current-account balance 17.6 15.0 29.3 45.7 38.9 39.5
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 3.5 3.0 5.4 7.7 6.4 6.3
Goods: exports fob 227.0 275.6 298.2 301.3 309.6 326.0
Goods: imports fob -186.1 -233.6 -250.6 -258.9 -277.8 -299.8
Trade balance 40.9 42.0 47.5 42.5 31.9 26.2
Services: credit 31.7 37.3 51.0 90.7 95.6 101.5
Services: debit -46.8 -51.7 -54.4 -70.9 -72.7 -72.0
Services: balance -15.1 -14.4 -3.4 19.9 22.8 29.5
Primary income: credit 10.4 8.4 9.2 9.0 8.7 9.4
Primary income: debit -24.4 -28.3 -34.4 -37.1 -36.1 -37.5
Primary income balance -14.0 -19.9 -25.3 -28.1 -27.5 -28.1
Secondary income: credit 10.9 12.6 16.2 17.9 18.6 19.3
Secondary income: debit -5.0 -5.3 -5.8 -6.5 -6.9 -7.4
Secondary income balance 5.9 7.3 10.4 11.4 11.6 11.9
We forecast that the current-account surplus will narrow in 2021 relative to 2020, to about 3% of GDP. This relatively small surplus will stem mainly from the continued weakness of the tourism sector amid ongoing restrictions, as well as a surge of imports bills attributed partly to the rising energy prices. Nevertheless, outbound shipments of merchandise goods will post a healthy recovery, with many of Thailand's major trading partners (such as the US) emerging from the coronavirus shock.
In 2022, as global demand firms up further amid the increased availability of coronavirus vaccines, Thailand's traditionally strong export sectors-electronics and automotive in particular-will propel the country's current-account surplus to about 5.4% of GDP. The current account will continue to post large surpluses in 2023-25, averaging 6.8% of GDP per year, on account of a recovery of inbound tourism and falling oil prices. Steadily falling energy prices in 2024-25 will also contribute to lower import bills.
Thailand will continue to champion free trade and deeper regional integration. Having already ratified RCEP, the country will focus on completing negotiations with the EU and commencing talks on joining the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership in the latter part of our forecast period.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Thailand Stocks and flows Net foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows had increased steadily in 2015-19, owing to a more stable political environment and the previous junta's efforts to attract infrastructure investment, which included a range of incentives and the liberalisation of strategic industries. The Covid-19 shock, which halted such growth in 2020, will continue to weigh on foreign investors' sentiment amid growing uncertainty about the emerging virus variants. Post-pandemic, expectations of policy continuity under a military-aligned government and a recovery of external demand should result in a substantial increase in inflows from 2023, assuming that the pandemic eases by then. Outward investment, particularly to countries within the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), is also expected to increase later in the forecast period after the pandemic eases. In 2020 the stock of inward FDI stood at US$291bn, equivalent to 58% of GDP, while the stock of outward FDI stood at US$156bn.
Origin and distribution The private manufacturing sector has traditionally attracted the largest proportion of FDI into Thailand. Before the pandemic disrupted the investing environment, manufacturers of automotive parts and producers of electronics and electrical appliances in particular have attracted significant foreign interest. However, in recent years, the financial and real-estate sectors have also gained prominence, particularly as industrial production faces bottlenecks and weak external conditions prevail even before the pandemic. Japanese firms retain their position as the main investors in Thailand, but investment from China has greatly increased in the past few years. Chinese investors, at least as much as their Japanese counterparts, are likely to gain from Thailand's infrastructure development plans, but this will come in the form of vendor contracts in construction, logistics planning and technology.
Determinants Thailand has traditionally been an attractive investment destination, owing to its decent infrastructure, flexible labour laws and relatively friendly regulatory regime for foreign investors. Nonetheless, any sign of political instability, which remains a persistent risk, as well as growing regional competition, will pose challenges to Thailand's attractiveness in the medium term. The Board of Investment (BOI) offers incentives, which generally take the form of exemptions from corporate income tax and reduced taxes on imported machinery. The BOI also offers non-tax incentives, including granting permission to bring in foreign workers, to own land and to take or remit foreign currency abroad. The new large-scale Eastern Economic Corridor (EEC) special economic zone (SEZ) includes fast-tracked environmental assessments as an incentive. Thailand has generally been regarded as one of the most open economies in the region to foreign investment. The BOI's seven-year investment promotion strategy, launched in 2015, has continued to extend incentives to newer industries such as alternative energy and environmental services, and hospitality and wellness, while removing existing incentives in certain low-value, labour-intensive industries. The BOI has also been encouraging investment into infrastructure, through a number of big-ticket projects. In addition, it has expedited the investment application and approval process in recent years, and is likely to retain this as a priority to lure back foreign investors after the pandemic. Disagreements from lawmakers and sometimes within the governing coalition will slow the pace of decision-making on investment related to expensive infrastructure megaprojects.
Impact Steady FDI inflows, which are dwindling amid the ongoing pandemic, have long helped to support overall economic growth and contributed to Thailand's development as a leading exporter to other countries in Asia in a number of sectors, including vehicles (particularly light pick-up trucks), electronics (especially computer parts) and electrical appliances. Reliance on FDI for financing major economic initiatives has nonetheless compounded the economy's already significant exposure to external conditions.
Potential Thailand's political scene has remained relatively stable, despite recurring student-led protests since the public approval of the junta-drafted constitution in a referendum in 2016 and the smooth accession of the new king. After a brief period of uncertainty around the election held in March 2019, political stability will be maintained in 2021-25. Serious challenges to the dominant royalist-military political alliance are unlikely to materialise during the forecast period, which bodes well for steady FDI flows. The volatile nature of Thailand's politics will remain a risk, however. A number of structural challenges may limit the potential for strong growth in FDI in the next five years, aside from the ongoing Covid-19 crisis. Thailand's attractiveness as a location for investment has been diminishing because of a rising relative cost base (particularly for labour) and sluggish domestic demand compared with other markets in South-east Asia. Although the current administration will maintain the junta's commitment to liberalisation, mainly through the legally binding 20-year National Strategy, access to strategic sectors such as telecommunications, media and utilities remains difficult. The standard of infrastructure in the country has improved in recent years, but it remains inferior to Malaysia, a rival manufacturing location, while poorer competitors such as Vietnam and Indonesia begin to catch up. The government's focus on expediting an infrastructure development programme, which dates to the junta era, will rectify this shortfall to a degree. Thailand will continue to attract foreign investment by virtue of being a leading economy with an open regulatory regime in the region, but there is a rising risk that it may lose out to its regional peers as they improve their business environments at a faster rate.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2015 2020 2025
Population (m)
Total 68.7 69.8 70.3
 Male 33.6 34.0 34.1
 Female 35.2 35.8 36.2
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 17.4 16.4 15.9
 15-64 72.7 71.7 69.5
 65+ 9.9 11.8 14.6
Young-age dependency ratio 0.24 0.23 0.23
Old-age dependency ratio 0.14 0.16 0.21
Working-age population (m) 50.0 50.1 48.9
Urbanisation (% of total) 47.7 51.5 55.5
Labour force (m) 38.5 38.0 37.3
       
Period averages   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth (%)   0.3 0.2
Working-age population growth (%)   0.0 -0.5
Labour force growth (%)   -0.3 -0.4
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   10.8 9.9
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   7.5 8.0
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   9.0 8.1
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   72.5 73.7
 Female   79.9 81.1
 Average   76.2 77.4
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; Economist Intelligence Unit estimates and forecasts; national statistics.
Family-planning programmes and changing social norms, such as later marriage and smaller families, will keep Thailand's average population growth rate relatively low, at 0.2% per year, in the forecast period. By 2025 the population is forecast to reach 70.3m, with females accounting for slightly more than half of the total. Owing to continued improvements in healthcare and childbirth procedures, the infant mortality rate will drop to an average of 8.1 per 1,000 live births in the forecast period, from nine per 1,000 in 2016-20. Life expectancy will also continue to edge upwards despite the temporary impact of the Covid-19 pandemic, with men expected to live for an average of 73.7 years in 2021-25, up from 72.5 in 2016-20, whereas female life expectancy will rise from an average of 79.9 to 81.1 years over the same period.
Demographic ageing and a smaller workforce will raise pressure on budget Thailand's population is ageing, with the proportion aged under 15 falling steadily from 2011. Meanwhile the proportion aged over 65 is set to grow to 14.6% in 2025, up from 11.8% in 2020. This will mean that the young-age dependency ratio will fall to 0.23 in 2025, from 0.24 in 2015, while the old-age dependency ratio will rise from 0.14 to 0.21 over the same period. This demographic trend will place further strain on healthcare and pension provision. The country's health system is structured around a universal healthcare scheme that was introduced in 2001 and has been free for all citizens since 2006. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects this scheme to remain free in the forecast period. It will, nonetheless, face growing burdens as a result of the country's ageing population, which has been exacerbated by the ongoing pandemic and the country's poor air quality.
Road accidents will continue to be a leading cause of death The crude death rate is forecast at eight per 1,000 in 2021-25. Non-com-municable illnesses such as heart disease, stroke and respiratory diseases are traditionally responsible for 74% of all deaths in Thailand, according to the World Health Organisation (WHO). The WHO also reported in 2015 that Thailand has the world's second-highest road traffic fatality rate, at 36.2 per 100,000 population. Deteriorating air quality-pollution levels in Bangkok (the capital) and northern provinces have hit record highs in recent years -also poses a threat of increased premature deaths and health burdens. Meanwhile, Thailand continues to confront the challenge of preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS, which emerged as the country's leading cause of death in the early 2000s. The UNAIDS estimates the death rate from the disease at about 21 per 100,000 people in 2019, although nearly 500,000 people continued to live with the disease in that year. Other infectious diseases, such as cholera, measles and mumps, have become less common but have not been eradicated.
The labour market will tighten owing to the ageing of Thailand's population, and shortages of skilled labour are likely to become more pronounced in the next five years. The size of the labour force will contract slowly, dropping to 37.3m by 2025, owing to a decline in the working-age population. Migrant labour will return from the coronavirus-related restrictions in the latter half of our forecast period and remain abundant post-pandemic, with workers from neighbouring Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos dominating unskilled jobs in the construction industry and as household employees. However, Thailand will gradually become a less attractive destination for unskilled migrants over the long term. In the near term, this will partly reflect a less welcoming stance on the part of the authorities and the general public, who are keen to prioritise the development of strategic industries in border-located special economic zones. In the longer term, job opportunities in Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos will expand as those economies grow faster than Thailand.
Rural-urban migration is still a significant demographic trend Despite slow population growth, the number of households in Thailand is expected to rise strongly in the forecast period, with a subsequent reduction in average household size. Internal migration and changing social patterns mean that it is increasingly common for households to consist of nuclear rather than extended families. Although Bangkok remains the main focus for the urban population, other cities, including Surat Thani, Chiang Mai and Hat Yai, have also been growing rapidly. The share of rural population has declined slowly over the years, but remains at almost 50% in 2020, according to the World Bank, which is still quite high by the standard of middle-income countries. This means that further expansion of metropolitan cities amid growing urbanisation will continue to feature as a prominent demographic theme in the forecast period following the disruption of Covid-19.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Population (m) 69.8 70.0 70.1 70.2 70.3 70.3
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 501.3 508.9 543.0 589.7 606.9 623.4
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 7,182 7,276 7,748 8,403 8,637 8,864
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 1,271.7 1,308.4 1,380.2 1,476.4 1,551.3 1,623.0
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 18,220 18,704 19,695 21,036 22,077 23,077
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 269.6 272.8 298.2 316.8 328.1 337.7
Median household income (US$) 9,764 9,997 10,477 11,675 11,768 12,357
Household consumption (US$ bn) 270.7 267.9 283.1 300.9 312.0 321.4
Household consumption per head (US$) 3,800 3,830 4,040 4,290 4,440 4,570
Exports of goods & services (% change) -19.5 11.8 7.8 7.5 1.8 3.3
Imports of goods & services (% change) -13.3 7.4 5.5 6.1 5.3 3.5
Thailand constitutes a sizeable market in its own right despite the fallout of the Covid-19 pandemic, with a population of 69.8m and nominal GDP equivalent to about US$501.3bn at market exchange rates in 2020. Moreover, the development of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Free-Trade Area means that goods exported from Thailand will continue to enjoy almost entirely duty-free access to ASEAN's market of 500m, including a middle class with growing disposable income. The implementation of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership from 2022 onwards will further expand the regional reach of its goods and services.
The Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts that aggregate personal disposable income will resume its growth trajectory from 2022, following a rare fall in 2020 and marginal rise in 2021 amid the pandemic. A more alarming challenge in the longer term will be the wide wealth gap, which will worsen as lower socioeconomic groups have been disproportionately affected by the ongoing pandemic. According to the latest data from the Asian Development Bank (ADB), of the 6.2% of the population defined as living below the nationally defined poverty line in 2019, the majority reside in the rural north and north-eastern parts of the country. This number will only grow in the aftermath of the pandemic, and it will take years for it to be reduced again. The capital, Bangkok, remains the wealthiest region by far. Structural issues, such as the fact that opportunities in rural areas remain limited compared with urban centres, will remain largely unaddressed.
High household debt will limit growth in consumption in 2021-25 Household spending will be tempered by high personal debt, which has been aggravated by the pandemic. In particular, debt burdens among those on lower incomes have a significant negative effect on consumer demand overall and limit the prospects for social mobility among this group. This will particularly affect the share available for spending on consumer goods, ensuring that Thailand's retail goods market experiences relatively low growth compared with its neighbours. Following a year of relatively modest growth in 2021, the release of pent-up demand will help to underpin retail sales in 2022-23, as the economy fully rebounds from a deep pandemic-induced recession.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 73,909 73,791 79,630 83,095 84,099 84,970
Housing & household fuels 22,706 22,022 21,756 22,883 23,365 23,837
Clothing & footwear 10,147 10,370 11,079 11,431 11,512 11,570
Household goods & services 9,507 9,666 10,276 10,671 10,792 10,897
Health 11,928 11,636 11,577 12,128 12,337 12,542
Transport & communications 42,420 41,564 41,671 42,068 43,420 42,664
Leisure & education 17,087 17,392 18,377 19,310 19,741 20,166
Hotels & restaurants 45,195 46,529 48,898 51,407 52,689 53,957
Other 32,642 34,935 39,822 47,937 53,997 60,802
Total 265,541 267,904 283,085 300,930 311,951 321,406
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 27.8 27.5 28.1 27.6 27.0 26.4
Housing & household fuels 8.6 8.2 7.7 7.6 7.5 7.4
Clothing & footwear 3.8 3.9 3.9 3.8 3.7 3.6
Household goods & services 3.6 3.6 3.6 3.5 3.5 3.4
Health 4.5 4.3 4.1 4.0 4.0 3.9
Transport & communications 16.0 15.5 14.7 14.0 13.9 13.3
Leisure & education 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.4 6.3 6.3
Hotels & restaurants 17.0 17.4 17.3 17.1 16.9 16.8
Other 12.3 13.0 14.1 15.9 17.3 18.9
On average, retail sales volumes will grow by 3.9% per year in 2021-25, which is faster than in 2016-20. In the first year of the forecast period, consumer sentiment will remain significantly dampened by the pandemic and its economic fallout. During this time, the government will maintain policies of facilitating cheap loans and cash handouts aimed at helping low-income and unemployed citizens. Given the uncertain state of private consumption amid the pandemic, the value-added tax (VAT) rate is likely to be frozen at the current level of 7% until the end of the forecast period. The government will finance such emergency measures by running a larger budget deficit and increasing borrowing. Meanwhile, higher "sin taxes" on sugar, alcohol and tobacco will have a minor impact on the consumption pattern of the population at large.
Discretionary spending will remain low in the early parts of the forecast period Consumer expenditure on essential items, such as food, household goods and clothing, will gradually fall as a proportion of total expenditure after reaching a new high in 2022. The average individual outlay on hotels and restaurants is likely to remain stagnant as a result of a much reduced number of international tourists until 2024, with the anticipated extension of Covid-19 travel restrictions. This will only be marginally offset by government efforts to promote domestic tourism as foreign tourists tend to spend more on this category on average. A similar situation applies to other categories of discretionary expenditure such as leisure, which will not return to pre-pandemic level until 2023 following the doldrums in 2020-21. Growth in healthcare spending is forecast to increase steadily in 2021-25 with an ageing population in the forecast period. The fluctuation in spending on transport and communications will partially reflect movement of global energy prices, as access to the internet will become more affordable during the forecast period.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2020   2025  
  Thailand Asia & Australasia (av) Thailand Asia & Australasia (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 4.0 6.5 4.0 6.4
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 287 513 374 679
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 8.6 22.0 7.9 19.5
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 0.8 1.6 1.0 1.7
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 27.8 25.6 26.7 26.3
Meat consumption (kg per person) 31.1 36.2 34.3 39.9
Milk consumption (litres per person) 32.9 70.1 36.5 65.7
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 1.5 1.3 1.6 1.4
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 122 107 125 119
Telephone main lines 71 93 45 90
Mobile phone subscribers 1,670 1,090 1,940 1,190
Television sets 398 678 480 865
Personal computers 136 369 83 402
Households
No. of households ('000) 19,470 981,950 19,440 1,042,100
No. of people per household (av) 3.6 3.9 3.6 3.7
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 9,850 12,110 12,380 15,730
Average monthly wage (US$) 464 880 532 1,130
Gini index 34.9 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); Economist Intelligence Unit estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population 0.08 -0.32 -0.19
Working-age population -0.56 -0.97 -0.83
Working-age minus total population -0.63 -0.65 -0.65
Labour force -0.51 -1.06 -0.88
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 2.6 2.2 2.3
Growth of real GDP 2.7 1.8 2.1
Labour productivity growth 2.9 2.9 2.9
Growth of capital stock 2.4 2.1 2.2
Total factor productivity growth 2.0 1.8 1.8
Initial conditions: The past two decades have been characterised by political turmoil, with coups in 2006 and 2014 and many (sometimes violent) anti-government protests and rallies. Economic growth has been volatile in the years since the 2008-09 global financial crisis owing to natural disasters and political crises. Physical infrastructure remains inadequate in many respects. Reform of the education system has long been promised, but successive governments have largely failed to modernise the quality of teaching or the curriculum. The workforce is therefore characterised by a low level of technical skills-a problem made worse by rapid demographic ageing. On top of these long-standing structural issues, the current government will also have to deal with a battered economy amid an extended coronavirus pandemic.
Demographic trends: Slower population growth and longer life expectancies will account for the ageing population. Although the female labour force participation rate will have risen by 2030, this will not prevent an average annual contraction of more than 1% in the labour force in 2031-50. Nevertheless, a gradual loosening of regulation concerning immigrants' right to work, especially in skilled positions, will preclude a steeper fall in the size of the workforce. Successive governments are likely to be forced to ease immi-gration and long-term visa policies further, owing to the country's negative demographic profile. The effectiveness of this will be limited by concerns among immigrants regarding rising inter-ethnic tensions, worsening air pollution and the growing attractiveness of neighbouring regions.
External conditions: Thailand faces a challenging external environment in the period to 2050. Although many export-oriented, labour-intensive industries will shift away from China, Thailand will struggle to capitalise on this opportunity owing to a lack of competitiveness compared with lower-cost locations, such as Cambodia and Vietnam. New regional rivals will also gain ground, including Laos and Indonesia. Closer integration with China could open up market opportunities for Thai businesses in more niche subsectors. One possibility is that Thailand may develop itself as a services centre for China and South-east Asia, meeting China's increasing demand for foreign holidays, regional-specific agricultural goods and other niche products. The government is already spearheading a move in that direction under its "Thailand 4.0" industrial policy and, in part, via its new Eastern Economic Corridor special economic zone. This is particularly the case for the tourism sector, and the ongoing expansion of transport infrastructure will go some way to supporting these aims, although the pandemic will weigh on the sector in the foreseeable future. Similarly, economic and trade links will be strengthened by the development of overland transport routes between China and Thailand in the next decade or so. The development of the Association of South-East Asian Nations Economic Community, formally established in 2015, will motivate business and technical innovation in Thailand to the degree that the country retains its prominence in the region. In 2021-30 a relocation of regional supply chains will pick up pace amid increased trade and geopolitical tensions. Although Thailand will benefit from these shifts, gains will be overshadowed by those of its regional compe-titors such as Taiwan and Vietnam.
Institutions and policy trends: In the coming decades, there will be no resolution of the power struggle between the established military and older bureaucratic elites in the capital, Bangkok, who will continue to side with the palace to bolster their legitimacy, and the rural as well as younger masses that form the majority of the Thai electorate. The level of political tension will depend on successive governments' ability to restructure the economy further away from agriculture and tourism, not least by moving a far greater proportion of the workforce into high-value industry and services. Democratically elected governments might be successful in instigating such a shift with the introduction of appropriate electoral reform, as well as a focus on medium-to-long-term rural development policies, rather than just short-term relief measures.
Long-term performance: The long-term outlook for Thailand's economy is heavily dependent on whether future governments prove capable of initiating and implementing the required structural reform that will continue into the medium-to-long term, while also upgrading infrastructure. Liberalisation in a number of important sectors, such as power and communications, will help Thailand to regain some of its competiveness relative to its regional neighbours. The effects of an ageing population on the budget could be offset by greater use of advanced healthcare technology and 5G-enabled technologies. On the issue of boosting productivity to rival Thailand's competitors, the government could improve educational attainment on the part of the existing workforce and further engage with large domestic private firms in promoting a more inno-vative economy. However, progress is likely to be slow in both areas. A more probable and effective measure would be greater immigrant access to the labour market, although rising ethnic tensions could undermine its implementation.
Income and market size
  2020 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 69.8 70.3 65.9
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 501.3 834.6 2,385.4
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 7,180 11,860 36,180
Private consumption (US$ bn) 265.5 452.8 1,585.5
Private consumption per head (US$) 3,800 6,440 24,050
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 1.3 2.0 4.5
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 18,220 28,980 67,540
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 257.3 625.4 2,737.4
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 233.7 570.8 2,856.5
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 28.8 31.1 37.7
Share of world population (%) 0.9 0.8 0.7
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.6 0.6 0.6
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 1.0 0.9 0.8
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 1.2 1.5 2.1
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability Thailand published a long-term climate change adaptation plan in 2015, entitled the Climate Change Master Plan 2015-50. It outlines a three-pronged approach divided into mitigation, adaptation and capacity-building targets. The near-term goals included setting emission-reduction targets and establishing incentives for low-carbon-emission development. Medium-term targets included reaching at least 25% of energy consumption from renewable sources. Longer-term targets are vaguer, with general goals to increase private investment in green industries and to reduce the carbon intensity of the economy. In line with this plan, Thailand signed and ratified the Paris Agreement of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP21) in 2016, committing to specific targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Under COP21, Thailand has pledged to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 20% from the projected business-as-usual forecast by 2030. The latest government figures in 2020 show reasonable results in the country's push to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, although the situation was skewed heavily by the pandemic-induced lockdown. More crucial to meeting the climate target by 2050 will be more far-reaching and costly measures, such as carbon pricing, which have yet to emerge as part of the government's policy agenda.
The main determinant of emissions levels in Thailand in the coming decades will still be energy sourcing. Coal-fired power plants generate close to one-fifth of the country's electricity, while lesser-polluting liquefied natural gas (LNG) facilities account for nearly two-thirds of electricity generation. Most of these plants are situated in the south of the country. The government will continue to push for the expansion of natural gas and renewable energy sources as a share of the country's energy mix, and renewable energy is likely to account for around one-quarter of total generation capacity by 2040. The commissioning of nuclear power plants in Thailand, which would reduce reliance on high-polluting forms, is also a possibility. However, the relatively low prices of coal will mean that it continues to account for a sizeable share of energy generation over the next two decades, unless there is robust international pressure (and incentives) for it to change course.
The country, especially its most economically productive areas including Bangkok, will be vulnerable to the intensified impact of climate change in the coming decades. This will be felt most acutely through the rising sea level, flooding, droughts and air pollution, which will in turn feed into economic insecurity, infrastructure strains, health burdens and social unrest. In 2019 The Economist Intelligence Unit developed a model to calculate the impact of climate change on long-term growth. Our latest calculations find that the Thai economy will be 3.1% smaller in 2050 than it would have been without this hit to growth.
Technological developments In May 2016 the junta unveiled "Thailand 4.0", a sector-specific industrial policy that aims to attract new investment in the transformation of the economy. The name of the strategy describes the intended next stage in the sectoral development of the economy, characterised by the industrial application of state-of-the-art technology. It follows the current domestic industrial situation, which is dominated by heavy industry with advanced machinery, in segments such as automotive and chemicals production. Although the pandemic in 2020-21 will force the government to sideline the initiative in the early parts of our forecast period, the main focus of the strategy in the longer term will return to strategic industries where value can be added via new technologies; these include smart electronics, high-income and medical tourism, agriculture and biotechnology, food and beverages, and the electrical automotive industry. It will also extend to the development of new industries, such as robotics, aerospace, digital services, bioenergy and biochemicals, and healthcare. Incentives for investment in these sectors will remain and are explicitly targeted towards the introduction of new technology, for example by offering import-duty exemption on capital goods for listed industries. Thailand will make some progress in upgrading its industries, but is likely to be constrained by a limited supply of skilled labour.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDnP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 2.5 3.1 3.0 2.3 -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
US GDP growth 1.7 2.3 3.0 2.2 -3.5 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.0
EU27 GDP growth 2.0 2.9 2.1 1.7 -6.3 4.5 4.3 2.6 2.2 2.0
Asia & Australasia growth 4.5 4.8 4.4 3.6 -1.5 6.2 4.5 4.0 3.9 3.8
World trade growth 2.1 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 8.0 5.6 4.7 4.2 4.3
US CPI 1.3 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
EU27 CPI 0.2 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.0 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
Manufactures export price -2.2 1.9 5.1 -1.4 0.2 6.5 1.4 1.9 2.7 2.5
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 44.0 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate 0.5 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6
¥:US$ (av) 108.8 112.1 110.4 109.0 106.8 108.7 110.6 112.1 113.1 111.9
¥:€ (av) 120.4 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 129.4 128.6 132.8 135.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Expenditure on GDP (Bt bn at current market prices)
GDP 14,586 15,484 16,366 16,899 15,689 16,133 16,941 18,105 18,693 19,325
Private consumption 7,294 7,577 8,004 8,405 8,310 8,493 8,832 9,239 9,608 9,964
Government consumption 2,463 2,525 2,648 2,735 2,779 2,911 3,050 3,176 3,307 3,425
Gross fixed investment 3,458 3,576 3,720 3,799 3,616 3,632 3,716 3,845 3,945 4,082
Exports of goods & services 9,789 10,324 10,610 10,052 8,052 9,914 10,727 11,722 12,093 12,691
Imports of goods & services 7,799 8,396 9,169 8,481 7,313 8,713 9,075 9,517 10,190 10,822
Stockbuilding -388 -27 398 210 131 117 90 -60 45 70
Domestic demand 12,826 13,651 14,769 15,149 14,836 15,152 15,688 16,200 16,905 17,541
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 413.2 456.2 506.5 544.3 501.3 508.9 543.0 589.7 606.9 623.4
Private consumption 206.6 223.3 247.7 270.7 265.5 267.9 283.1 300.9 312.0 321.4
Government consumption 69.8 74.4 82.0 88.1 88.8 91.8 97.7 103.4 107.4 110.5
Gross fixed investment 98.0 105.4 115.1 122.4 115.6 114.6 119.1 125.3 128.1 131.7
Exports of goods & services 277.3 304.2 328.4 323.8 257.3 312.7 343.8 381.8 392.6 409.4
Imports of goods & services 221.0 247.4 283.8 273.2 233.7 274.9 290.9 310.0 330.9 349.1
Stockbuilding -11.0 -0.8 12.3 6.8 4.2 3.7 2.9 -2.0 1.5 2.3
Domestic demand 363.4 402.2 457.1 487.9 474.1 478.0 502.8 527.7 548.9 565.8
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 50.0 48.9 48.9 49.7 53.0 52.6 52.1 51.0 51.4 51.6
Government consumption 16.9 16.3 16.2 16.2 17.7 18.0 18.0 17.5 17.7 17.7
Gross fixed investment 23.7 23.1 22.7 22.5 23.0 22.5 21.9 21.2 21.1 21.1
Stockbuilding -2.7 -0.2 2.4 1.2 0.8 0.7 0.5 -0.3 0.2 0.4
Exports of goods & services 67.1 66.7 64.8 59.5 51.3 61.4 63.3 64.7 64.7 65.7
Imports of goods & services 53.5 54.2 56.0 50.2 46.6 54.0 53.6 52.6 54.5 56.0
Memorandum items
Oil production ('000 b/d) 486 486 478 477 c 495 c 492 497 502 505 505
National savings ratio (%) 31.6 32.5 30.8 30.7 27.4 c 26.2 27.9 28.7 27.7 27.8
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Real expenditure on GDP (Bt bn at constant 1988 prices)
GDP 9,851 10,263 10,691 10,934 10,256 10,407 10,741 11,221 11,559 11,879
Private consumption 5,052 5,208 5,446 5,661 5,609 5,666 5,787 6,044 6,265 6,467
Government consumption 1,528 1,531 1,571 1,597 1,610 1,653 1,691 1,725 1,764 1,798
Gross fixed investment 2,419 2,462 2,553 2,604 2,478 2,509 2,588 2,692 2,775 2,886
Exports of goods & services 7,368 7,745 8,005 7,767 6,255 6,993 7,536 8,100 8,248 8,517
Imports of goods & services 6,407 6,808 7,377 7,001 6,070 6,519 6,880 7,300 7,688 7,959
Stockbuilding -349 -72 260 115 157 65 20 -40 20 10
Domestic demand 8,651 9,129 9,830 9,977 9,855 9,893 10,086 10,420 10,824 11,161
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 3.4 4.2 4.2 2.3 -6.2 1.5 3.2 4.5 3.0 2.8
Private consumption 2.9 3.1 4.6 4.0 -0.9 1.0 2.1 4.4 3.6 3.2
Government consumption 2.4 0.2 2.6 1.7 0.8 2.6 2.3 2.0 2.3 1.9
Gross fixed investment 2.8 1.8 3.7 2.0 -4.8 1.3 3.1 4.0 3.1 4.0
Exports of goods & services 2.6 5.1 3.4 -3.0 -19.5 11.8 7.8 7.5 1.8 3.3
Imports of goods & services -1.0 6.3 8.3 -5.1 -13.3 7.4 5.5 6.1 5.3 3.5
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -2.4 2.8 3.2 -1.4 0.4 -0.9 -0.4 -0.6 0.5 -0.1
Domestic demand 0.2 5.5 7.7 1.5 -1.2 0.4 1.9 3.3 3.9 3.1
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 1.5 1.6 2.3 2.0 -0.5 0.6 1.2 2.4 2.0 1.7
Government consumption 0.4 0.0 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.3
Gross fixed investment 0.7 0.4 0.9 0.5 -1.1 0.3 0.8 1.0 0.7 1.0
External balance 2.6 -0.3 -3.0 1.3 -5.3 2.8 1.7 1.3 -2.1 0.0
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Origin of GDP (Bt bn at constant 1988 prices)
GDP at factor cost 9,835 10,249 10,670 10,881 10,207 10,356 10,689 11,166 11,503 11,821
Agriculture 608 631 663 671 682 696 713 730 744 757
Industry 3,588 3,653 3,745 3,805 3,539 3,698 3,868 4,015 4,095 4,190
Services 5,639 5,965 6,262 6,405 5,986 5,962 6,108 6,421 6,663 6,875
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture -1.3 3.7 5.1 1.3 1.6 2.0 2.5 2.3 2.0 1.7
Industry 2.7 1.8 2.5 1.6 -7.0 4.5 4.6 3.8 2.0 2.3
Services 4.4 5.8 5.0 2.3 -6.5 -0.4 2.4 5.1 3.8 3.2
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 8.4 8.3 8.1 8.0 8.7 8.7 8.7 8.5 8.4 8.3
Industry 35.5 35.0 34.7 34.8 34.8 36.2 37.1 37.2 37.2 37.4
Services 54.8 55.4 56.1 56.1 55.4 54.0 53.2 53.2 53.3 53.2
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 4.3 4.7 3.1 3.1 -4.8 0.3 2.5 4.7 3.2 3.0
Total factor productivity growth 3.0 3.6 2.5 1.8 -5.9 0.0 2.0 3.8 2.3 2.0
Growth of capital stock 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.2 2.3 2.4
Growth of potential GDP 3.6 4.2 4.0 2.5 -5.5 1.4 2.5 3.7 2.7 2.5
Growth of real GDP 3.4 c 4.2 c 4.2 c 2.3 c -6.2 c 1.5 3.2 4.5 3.0 2.8
Growth of real GDP per head 3.1 c 3.8 c 3.8 c 2.0 c -6.4 c 1.2 3.0 4.3 2.9 2.7
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 69.0 69.2 69.4 69.6 69.8 a 70.0 70.1 70.2 70.3 70.3
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 413.2 456.2 506.5 544.3 501.3 a 508.9 543.0 589.7 606.9 623.4
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 5,990 6,590 7,300 7,820 7,180 a 7,280 7,750 8,400 8,640 8,860
Private consumption (US$ bn) 206.6 223.3 247.7 270.7 265.5 a 267.9 283.1 300.9 312.0 321.4
Private consumption per head (US$) 3,000 3,230 3,570 3,890 3,800 a 3,830 4,040 4,290 4,440 4,570
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 1,145.7 1,205.5 1,286.3 1,339.3 1,271.7 1,308.4 1,380.2 1,476.4 1,551.3 1,623.0
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 16,610 17,420 18,530 19,240 18,220 18,700 19,700 21,040 22,080 23,080
Personal disposable income (Bt bn) 7,742 b 8,041 b 8,493 b 8,921 b 8,436 8,648 9,303 9,725 10,104 10,468
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 219.3 b 236.9 b 262.9 b 287.3 b 269.6 272.8 298.2 316.8 328.1 337.7
Growth of real disposable income (%) 2.9 b 3.1 b 4.6 b 4.0 b -5.2 1.3 5.6 4.4 3.6 3.1
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.93 0.92 0.92 0.91 0.91 a 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90
Share of world exports of goods (%) 1.37 1.35 1.32 1.32 1.33 1.35 1.37 1.32 1.30 1.29
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Government expenditure 19.8 18.7 18.4 17.1 21.5 21.7 21.4 20.3 20.5 20.5
Interest 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.6
Non-interest 18.9 17.8 17.6 16.3 20.7 20.9 20.8 19.8 20.0 19.9
Government revenue 16.3 15.2 15.8 15.2 14.8 15.2 15.5 16.1 16.8 17.0
Budget balance -3.5 -3.5 -2.5 -1.9 -6.7 -6.5 -5.9 -4.2 -3.8 -3.5
Primary balance -2.6 -2.6 -1.7 -1.0 -5.9 -5.8 -5.3 -3.7 -3.2 -3.0
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate Bt:US$ (av) 35.3 33.9 32.3 31.0 31.3 31.7 31.2 30.7 30.8 31.0
Exchange rate Bt:US$ (year-end) 35.8 32.7 32.4 30.2 30.0 33.1 31.0 30.8 30.9 31.1
Exchange rate Bt:¥100 (av) 32.5 30.3 29.3 28.5 29.3 29.2 28.2 27.4 27.2 27.7
Exchange rate Bt:¥100 (year-end) 30.7 29.0 29.6 27.7 29.1 29.9 27.8 27.2 27.2 28.1
Real effective exchange rate (av), CPI-based 100.1 c 103.2 c 106.8 c 112.3 c 109.5 c 103.7 106.4 107.9 106.1 103.4
Purchasing power parity Bt:US$ (av) 12.7 12.8 12.7 12.6 12.3 12.3 12.3 12.3 12.1 11.9
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 4.2 5.0 4.7 3.6 10.1 7.6 1.9 4.7 0.6 3.5
Domestic credit growth (%) 4.5 4.7 4.8 2.7 7.4 c 4.5 5.7 3.3 -0.5 1.1
Commercial banks' prime rate (av; %) 4.5 4.4 4.1 4.1 3.3 3.3 3.7 4.3 4.6 4.8
Deposit rate (av; %) 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.4 0.6 0.4 0.6 1.2 1.5 1.7
Money market rate (av; %) 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.6 0.6 0.5 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.6
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 38.3 38.1 38.4 38.2 38.0 38.4 38.3 37.8 37.5 37.3
Labour force (% change) -0.6 -0.5 0.8 -0.5 -0.5 1.1 -0.3 -1.4 -0.6 -0.6
Unemployment rate (%) 1.0 1.2 1.1 1.0 1.7 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.2
Wage and price inflation (% change except labour costs per hour)
Consumer prices (av) 0.2 0.7 1.1 0.7 -0.8 a 1.3 1.7 1.4 0.8 0.7
Producer prices (av) -1.2 0.7 0.4 -1.0 -1.6 4.0 3.3 1.2 0.4 -0.5
GDP deflator (av) 2.6 1.9 1.5 1.0 -1.0 a 1.4 1.7 2.3 0.2 0.6
Private consumption deflator (av) 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.0 -0.2 a 1.2 1.8 0.1 0.3 0.5
Government consumption deflator (av) 2.3 2.3 2.2 1.6 0.8 a 2.0 2.4 2.1 1.8 1.6
Fixed investment deflator (av) -0.2 1.6 0.3 0.1 0.0 a -0.8 -0.8 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5
Average nominal wages 1.8 -0.1 1.4 2.3 1.9 1.6 2.6 2.3 2.0 1.5
Average real wages 1.6 -0.7 0.3 1.6 2.8 0.3 0.9 0.9 1.2 0.8
Unit labour costs (Bt-based; av) -2.4 -4.7 -1.6 -0.6 9.0 1.8 0.6 -1.8 -0.7 -0.9
Unit labour costs (US$-based; av) -5.3 -0.9 3.4 3.4 8.2 0.5 2.2 -0.2 -1.0 -1.6
Labour costs per hour (Bt) 94.4 b 94.3 b 95.6 b 97.8 b 99.7 101.3 103.9 106.3 108.4 110.1
Labour costs per hour (US$) 2.7 b 2.8 b 3.0 b 3.2 b 3.2 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.5 3.6
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance 43.4 44.0 28.4 38.2 17.6 15.0 29.3 45.7 38.9 39.5
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 10.5 9.6 5.6 7.0 3.5 3.0 5.4 7.7 6.4 6.3
Goods: exports fob 213.5 233.7 251.1 242.7 227.0 275.6 298.2 301.3 309.6 326.0
Goods: imports fob -177.7 -201.1 -228.7 -216.0 -186.1 -233.6 -250.6 -258.9 -277.8 -299.8
Trade balance 35.8 32.6 22.4 26.7 40.9 42.0 47.5 42.5 31.9 26.2
Services: credit 63.8 71.0 77.5 81.2 31.7 37.3 51.0 90.7 95.6 101.5
Services: debit -43.5 -46.7 -54.9 -56.9 -46.8 -51.7 -54.4 -70.9 -72.7 -72.0
Services balance 20.3 24.3 22.5 24.3 -15.1 -14.4 -3.4 19.9 22.8 29.5
Primary income: credit 6.5 8.5 8.7 11.2 10.4 8.4 9.2 9.0 8.7 9.4
Primary income: debit -25.9 -29.0 -33.2 -31.2 -24.4 -28.3 -34.4 -37.1 -36.1 -37.5
Primary income balance -19.4 -20.5 -24.5 -20.0 -14.0 -19.9 -25.3 -28.1 -27.5 -28.1
Secondary income: credit 10.6 11.2 11.8 13.4 10.9 12.6 16.2 17.9 18.6 19.3
Secondary income: debit -3.8 -3.6 -3.8 -6.2 -5.0 -5.3 -5.8 -6.5 -6.9 -7.4
Secondary income balance 6.8 7.5 8.0 7.2 5.9 7.3 10.4 11.4 11.6 11.9
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 99.8 103.3 106.9 109.2 109.1 119.8 121.7 122.9 124.3 125.7
Export prices (% change) -0.3 3.5 3.5 2.1 -0.1 9.8 1.6 1.0 1.1 1.2
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 93.4 98.5 104.1 106.0 103.1 115.9 114.9 113.5 115.4 118.4
Import prices (% change) -2.6 5.5 5.7 1.8 -2.7 12.5 -0.9 -1.2 1.7 2.6
Terms of trade (2010=100) 106.9 104.9 102.7 103.1 105.8 103.3 106.0 108.3 107.7 106.2
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 3.3 b 7.5 b 5.9 b -0.8 b -4.7 10.1 5.6 5.1 4.7 4.0
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ m)
Inward direct investment 3,486 8,285 13,186 4,817 -5,034 1,794 3,950 8,033 7,189 6,640
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 0.8 1.8 2.6 0.9 -1.0 0.4 0.7 1.4 1.2 1.1
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 3.6 7.9 11.5 3.9 -4.4 1.6 3.3 6.4 5.6 5.0
Outward direct investment -13,393 -14,217 -17,368 -10,144 -18,157 -16,834 -21,024 -13,749 -11,983 -9,890
Net foreign direct investment -9,906 -5,932 -4,182 -5,328 -23,191 -15,040 -17,074 -5,716 -4,794 -3,250
Stock of foreign direct investment 199,623 231,871 239,625 272,864 290,852 292,646 296,596 304,629 311,818 318,458
Stock of foreign direct investment per head (US$) 2,894 3,350 3,451 3,919 4,167 4,184 4,232 4,340 4,438 4,528
Stock of foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 48.3 50.8 47.3 50.1 58.0 57.5 54.6 51.7 51.4 51.1
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.13 0.38 2.69 0.37 -0.39 0.13 0.27 0.52 0.45 0.40
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.71 0.77 0.75 0.80 0.87 0.80 0.76 0.75 0.74 0.73
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 139.2 161.7 172.5 180.2 182.6 187.4 189.6 188.1 188.9 189.5
Total external debt (% of GDP) 33.7 35.4 34.1 33.1 36.4 36.8 34.9 31.9 31.1 30.4
Debt/exports ratio (%) 48.0 50.5 50.0 52.5 67.1 57.5 51.9 46.1 44.8 42.6
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 5.0 4.7 5.4 7.8 12.0 10.3 7.8 6.6 6.1 5.7
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is The Economist Intelligence Unit
Global data US & OECD GDP growth: OECD
World trade growth: Economist Intelligence Unit aggregate
US consumer price inflation: OECD
Oil prices: dated Brent Blend
Non-oil commodity prices: IMF, IFS
Manufactures prices: UN, Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
Domestic data GDP growth: Bank of Thailand, Annual Report; Asian Development Bank, Key Indicators
US$ GDP: IMF, IFS
Population: Asian Development Bank, Key Indicators; UN, World Development Report
GDP per head: nominal GDP divided by population
Inflation: consumer price index, Department of Business Economics, Ministry of Commerce
Budget: fiscal year (October-September)
Wages: local-currency wage data derived from minimum-wage data, inflated to correspond with occasional UNIDO data for US dollar manufacturing-sector wages
Exchange rates: IMF, IFS
Commercial banks' prime rate: Bank of Thailand, Quarterly Bulletin
Balance of payments: IMF, IFS
Foreign debt: World Bank, International Debt Statistics; OECD, External Debt Statistics (for data on short-term debt)
Abbreviations IFS: International Financial Statistics
UNIDO: UN Industrial Development Organisation
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows The Economist Intelligence Unit to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by The Economist Intelligence Unit for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2016-20) and from Economist Intelligence Unit assessments for the forecast period (2021-25). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by The Economist Intelligence Unit for 2016-20. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2021-25 are based on Economist Intelligence Unit assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; The Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2016-20 ranges are then used to derive 2021-25 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2021-25, not to the likely situation in 2025 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2018 or 2023). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2016-20   2021-25  
  Thailand Regional average a Thailand Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 3 3.8 3 3.7
  2. Risk of social unrest 2 3.1 2 3.3
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 3 3.3 3 3.5
  4. Government and opposition 4 3.7 3 3.8
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 3 3.4 3 3.5
  6. International disputes or tensions 4 3.4 3 2.8
  7. Government policy towards business 3 3.5 4 3.5
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 3 3.4 3 3.4
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 3 3.3 3 3.3
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 2 2.9 3 3.2
 11. Efficiency of legal system 3 3.1 3 3.2
 12. Corruption 2 2.7 2 3.1
 13. Impact of crime 3 3.5 3 3.8
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 5 4.6 5 4.6
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 3 3.4 3 2.8
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 4 3.7 4 3.4
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 4 4.6 5 4.4
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 5 4.5 5 4.6
  6. Quality of policymaking 3 3.5 3 3.5
  7. Institutional underpinnings 4 3.5 4 3.6
  8. Asset prices 3 2.6 2 2.4
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 5 4.4 5 4.6
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 3 3.6 4 3.8
  3. Real GDP growth* 2 2.8 3 3.6
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 4 3.8 4 3.7
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 1 1.5 3 2.9
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 1 1.8 3 3.0
  7. The natural resource endowment* 3 2.4 3 2.4
  8. Profitability* 2 2.8 3 3.5
  9. Regional integration 3 2.9 3 3.2
 10. Proximity to markets 2 2.5 2 2.4
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 5 4.0 5 4.1
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 4 3.2 4 3.6
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 4 3.5 4 3.6
  4. Promotion of competition 2 2.9 3 3.1
  5. Protection of intellectual property 2 2.7 2 3.1
  6. Price controls 4 3.6 4 3.7
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 3 2.8 2 2.6
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 3 3.2 2 3.2
  9. Minority shareholders 4 3.4 4 3.6
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 3 3.6 4 3.6
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 4 3.4 3 3.4
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 3 3.9 4 4.1
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 3 3.3 3 3.4
  5. Government favouritism 4 3.6 4 3.5
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 4 3.8 4 3.9
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 4 3.8 4 4.1
  3. Ease of trading* 4 3.8 3 3.8
  4. Openness of trade* 5 3.9 5 3.8
  5. Restrictions on the current account 5 4.5 5 4.5
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 5 3.7 5 4.1
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 4 4.5 4 4.4
  3. Value-added tax* 5 4.2 4 4.1
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 5 3.8 5 3.9
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 3 3.1 3 3.5
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 3 3.3 3 3.6
  7. Tax complexity 4 3.2 4 3.5
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 3 3.4 3 3.2
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 4 3.8 4 4.0
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 5 4.1 5 4.3
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 3 3.2 3 3.5
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 4 3.3 4 3.8
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 3 3.5 3 3.6
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 5 4.2 5 4.2
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 3 3.4 3 3.9
  3. Quality of workforce* 3 3.1 3 3.2
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 3 3.6 3 3.6
  5. Health of the workforce* 4 4.0 4 4.0
  6. Level of technical skills 3 3.5 3 3.7
  7. Cost of living* 3 2.5 3 2.5
  8. Incidence of strikes* 4 3.7 4 3.8
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 4 3.3 4 3.5
 10. Extent of wage regulation 4 3.7 3 3.6
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 3 3.2 4 2.9
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 2 2.9 4 3.5
  2. Broadband connection speed* 5 3.1 5 3.9
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 2 3.1 3 3.6
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 3 3.4 3 3.6
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 2 2.6 2 2.9
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 3 3.5 3 3.7
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 3 3.5 3 3.8
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 3 2.8 3 3.3
  9. Rents of office space* 2 2.2 2 2.1
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 3 3.6 3 3.6
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 4 3.8 4 4.1
  3. Scope of e-government* 3 3.3 3 3.8
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 5 4.1 3 4.0
  5. Internet use* 2 3.1 4 3.6
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 3 3.1 5 3.7
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 2 3.2 4 3.6
  8. Research infrastructure* 3 3.4 3 3.5
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 17 countries: Australia, Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.

Subject: Infrastructure; Foreign exchange rates; Politics; Income taxes; Pandemics; Consumption; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Population growth; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Older people; Coronaviruses; Tourism; Tax reform; Households; Climate change; COVID-19; Economic forecasts

Business indexing term: Subject: Infrastructure Foreign exchange rates Income taxes Consumption International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Tax reform Economic forecasts

Location: Thailand; Asia-Pacific region

Company / organization: Name: Economist Intelligence Unit; NAICS: 516210

Identifier / keyword: Thailand; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Forecast Thailand August 2021

Publication title: Country Forecast. Thailand; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09668624

e-ISSN: 20489722

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611014176

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-thailand-august-2021/docview/2611014176/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Tajikistan 3rd Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-tajikistan-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2626710926/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Tajikistan&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Tajikistan+3rd+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-13&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Tajikistan&amp;rft.issn=14780402&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Tajikistan; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: Tajikistan; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Tajikistan 3rd Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Tajikistan; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 14780402

e-ISSN: 2047590X

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2626710926

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-tajikistan-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2626710926/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-02-09

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Oman August 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-oman-august-2021/docview/2625691202/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Oman&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Oman+August+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-10&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Oman&amp;rft.issn=14626667&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Oman; Middle East

Identifier / keyword: Oman; Middle East

Title: Country Report Oman August 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Oman; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 14626667

e-ISSN: 20475497

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2625691202

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-oman-august-2021/docview/2625691202/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-02-06

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Venezuela August 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-august-2021/docview/2625691188/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Venezuela+August+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-10&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=13507133&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Report Venezuela August 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Venezuela; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507133

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2625691188

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-august-2021/docview/2625691188/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-02-06

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Venezuela August 2021 Updater

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-august-2021-updater/docview/2611016520/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: [...]there are substantial risks to this assumption stemming from the impact of US sanctions and a fundamental lack of incentives for investment in the domestic oil industry. Key indicators Key indicators 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Real GDP growth (%) -31.0 3.8 13.5 5.2 3.2 2.5 Consumer price inflation (av; %) 3,634 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3 Budget balance (% of GDP) -5.0 -7.1 -6.3 -6.5 -6.3 -7.1 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.7 1.2 3.3 2.3 1.1 1.0 Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 13.9 10.1 9.9 12.2 17.7 18.3 Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (av) 320,729.3 4,269,390.3 37,327,574 175,928,166 570,048,680 1,152,117,580 Exchange rate BsS:€1 (av) 366,042.5 5,103,342.0 43,673,261 201,877,570 669,807,199 1,399,822,859 Country forecast overview: Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 29.7 Population growth -0.4 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 50.4 Real GDP growth -24.6 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 122.3 Real domestic demand growth -25.2 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,696 Inflation 7,490.5 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,112 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.6 Exchange rate (av) BsS:US$ 320,729.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 0.8 a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. The Economist Intelligence Unit estimates that the goods trade surplus fell to US$12.6bn in 2019, amid a long-term decline in oil exports.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Venezuela+August+2021+Updater&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-10&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=09669574&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - Despite Venezuela's socioeconomic collapse and the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela, to retain power throughout the 2021-25 forecast period. Mr Maduro's position will be supported primarily by his grip over a complex security apparatus and the opposition's lack of de facto power. On this basis, we expect continued deterioration of the economy, sustained outward migration, and a poorer and more violent Venezuela. Despite US sanctions (and their impact on oil production), the Maduro regime has managed internal dissent through a patronage system that rewards loyalty, and through its strict control over the security forces.
- The scale of the socioeconomic collapse and the elevated level of political instability will ensure that the Maduro regime continues to be challenged both economically and politically. In particular, there is a significant risk of regime change stemming from a possible breakdown in the patronage system that sustains the security forces' support of the regime. Under our baseline forecast, we assume that Mr Maduro will avoid this, as long as oil rents recover from this year onwards. However, there are substantial risks to this assumption stemming from the impact of US sanctions and a fundamental lack of incentives for investment in the domestic oil industry.
- De facto dollarisation of the economy is expanding. Concurrently, the government has taken measures that have allowed the official exchange rate to float. These measures have aided price stability and therefore increased the availability of some basic goods. However, the measures are not a product of economic orthodoxy, but rather of policy decisions to ensure the regime's survival. We do not expect to see the comprehensive economic and institutional reforms that would be required to resolve Venezuela's economic crisis within the forecast period.

Enlarge this image.
Enlarge this image.
Country forecast overview: Key indicators Key indicators 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Real GDP growth (%) -31.0 3.8 13.5 5.2 3.2 2.5
Consumer price inflation (av; %) 3,634 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3
Budget balance (% of GDP) -5.0 -7.1 -6.3 -6.5 -6.3 -7.1
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -4.7 1.2 3.3 2.3 1.1 1.0
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 13.9 10.1 9.9 12.2 17.7 18.3
Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (av) 320,729.3 4,269,390.3 37,327,574 175,928,166 570,048,680 1,152,117,580
Exchange rate BsS:€1 (av) 366,042.5 5,103,342.0 43,673,261 201,877,570 669,807,199 1,399,822,859
Country forecast overview: Business environment rankings                
Value of index a     Global rank b     Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25   2016-20 2021-25   2016-20 2021-25
3.07 3.08   81 82   12 12
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

- Venezuela ranks 82nd of 82 countries in the global business environment rankings for 2021-25, having been in 81st place in the 2016-20 historical period, despite minor improvements in some areas. Reforms to institutions, economic policy and the business environment are unlikely.

Country forecast overview: Venezuela's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2021-22: Enforcement of price controls remains lax, but risk of state intervention remains high. Corruption and selective application of regulations are common and continue to undermine free competition.
2023-25: Contract rights remain weak, and red tape and ad hoc interventionism continue.
Policy towards foreign investment 2021-22: Government efforts to revive foreign investment fail owing to US sanctions and political and economic instability.
2023-25: Investment flows remain low amid ongoing economic volatility. Intellectual property protection and private property rights deteriorate.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2021-22: Currency controls are weakened, but access to foreign currency remains limited. US sanctions hamper trade.
2023-25: Efforts to remove trade and capital controls are undertaken on a gradual basis, and de facto dollarisation advances. Domestic supply of foreign currency remains limited as oil prices decline.
Taxes 2021-22: Risks of further unrest and political instability reduce probability of central government increasing taxes. However, municipal authorities raise taxes owing to funding shortfalls.
2023-25: Tax system remains complex and unwieldy, but risk of discriminatory, ad hoc tax measures declines.
Financing 2021-22: Inflation remains high, and concerns surrounding economic instability restrict financing to only short term.
2023-25: Economic adjustments take time to feed through to solid, sustainable growth in credit to private sector and development of capital markets. Long-term finance remains in short supply.
Labour market 2021-22: Labour laws add substantially to non-wage costs. Firms prohibited from firing workers until end-2022. Ongoing emigration of skilled labour aggravates skills shortages.
2023-25: Labour market rigidities persist despite some increased flexibility in hiring and firing practices.
Infrastructure 2021-22: Underinvestment in water network and electricity grid leads to continued rationing and unpredictable blackouts.
2023-25: Investors remain highly cautious about committing to long-term capital projects. Infrastructure deteriorates even further.
Technological readiness 2021-22: E-government services remain almost non-existent. Telecommunications sector is opened to foreign investment, but with little interest. Local use of cryptocurrency expands among middle- and high-income households.
2023-25: Limited regulatory capacity and years of underinvestment continue to restrict internet and mobile coverage.
Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 29.7 Population growth -0.4
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 50.4 Real GDP growth -24.6
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 122.3 Real domestic demand growth -25.2
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 1,696 Inflation 7,490.5
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 4,112 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 4.6
Exchange rate (av) BsS:US$ 320,729.3 FDI inflows (% of GDP) 0.8
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Background: From 1958 until the mid-1990s, two parties-Acción Democrática and the Comité de Organización Política Electoral Independiente-alternated in power. Frequent economic crises and endemic corruption eventually led to a collapse in support for both parties and culminated in the 1998 election of Hugo Chávez, a former lieutenant-colonel and leader of a failed coup in 1992. Mr Chávez's policy programme exacerbated political polarisation, but several attempts to remove him from power before his death in March 2013 proved unsuccessful. His chosen successor, Nicolás Maduro, has seen his own popularity plummet, as his macroeconomic mismanagement-aggravated by wide-ranging US sanctions-has plunged the country into a state of economic collapse.
Political structure: Although Venezuela is nominally a federal republic with separation of powers, the ruling Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV) has systematically eroded institutions. In December 2015 the opposition coalition, Mesa de la Unidad Democrática, won control of the unicameral National Assembly. In January 2016 the politicised Supreme Court declared the legislature to be in contempt of court, blocking all subsequent legislation. In August 2017 a PSUV-only Constituent Assembly (ANC) granted itself control over all legislative matters, becoming the country's de facto legislature and sidelining the National Assembly. The ANC was dissolved at end-2020, after the PSUV and its allies regained control of the legislature in an election that was widely regarded as rigged.
Policy issues: The most pressing policy issue is the need to stabilise the crisis-ridden economy. The monetisation of vast public deficits has created an ever-increasing excess of domestic currency, triggering hyperinflation. Mismanagement of PDVSA (the state-owned oil company and originator of practically all foreign-currency inflows into the country) has resulted in a sharp contraction in oil production. Attempts to address these problems through distortionary price and currency controls proved actively counter-productive and led to major shortages of both foreign currency and basic goods. The scarcity of foreign exchange also led to arrears on most of the external debt issued by the sovereign and state-owned firms. The Maduro regime is now changing tack and pursuing incremental pro-market reforms, but its efforts are hindered by chronic economic instability, a lack of confidence in the legal framework and wide-ranging US sanctions.
Taxation: The top corporate tax rate is 34% for non-oil companies and 50% for oil firms. The value-added tax (VAT) rate stands at 12%.
Foreign trade: The Economist Intelligence Unit estimates that the goods trade surplus fell to US$12.6bn in 2019, amid a long-term decline in oil exports. We estimate that the trade account deteriorated further in 2020, shifting to a US$1.7bn deficit.
Major exports 2018 % of total Major imports 2013 % of total
Petroleum 88.7 Intermediate goods 56.5
Other 11.3 Capital goods 24.2
    Consumer goods 19.3
       
Leading markets 2019 % of total Leading suppliers 2019 % of total
India 27.0 China 30.6
UAE 19.6 US 18.4
Netherlands Antilles 6.4 Brazil 7.7
Aruba 1.9 India 6.3
Outlook for 2021-25: Political stability The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the civic-military regime, led by Nicolás Maduro of the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV, the Chavistas), to remain in power throughout the 2021-25 forecast period, despite its role in fomenting the country's ongoing socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis. A number of factors underpin our forecast; particularly significant is the regime's strict control over the military, the police and paramilitary forces. This control, which depends on a patronage system that rewards the loyalty of high-ranking officials, will allow the regime to manage internal dissent.
In our view, the domestic opposition will pose little threat to Mr Maduro's power. Having retaken control of the National Assembly from the opposition in January, the Chavistas have unchecked authority over all branches of govern-ment. Political control is nominally disputed by Juan Guaidó, the leader of the Frente Amplio Venezuela Libre (FAVL) opposition alliance and self-declared interim president, but the opposition lacks de facto power. Mr Guaidó retains the backing of most Western powers, including the US, which he has used to co-ordinate a "maximum pressure" campaign against the Maduro regime. However, with these hardline tactics failing to deliver results-and in some cases proving counterproductive-domestic support for Mr Guaidó is waning.
Against this backdrop, the PSUV has made gestures in recent weeks aimed at facilitating rapprochement with the opposition, with a view to securing sanctions relief from the US. One significant concession by the regime is the inclusion of two opposition representatives on the five-member board of the newly appointed electoral authority (CNE). Ahead of regional and local elections on November 21st, the CNE has taken a number of steps to rebuild confidence in Venezuela's electoral system. These include a renewal of the electoral register, an audit of the automated voting system and invitations to international observers (including the EU and the UN) to oversee the November polls. The regime has also sought to launch fresh political negotiations, with the first round of talks to take place in mid-August. However, these gestures appear to be largely cosmetic, and Mr Maduro is unlikely to acquiesce to any process that would actually threaten his grip on power. A renewed crackdown on opposition leaders in mid-July reinforces our view that Mr Maduro is not engaging in good faith. As a result, the long-running political stalemate is likely to persist.
Nevertheless, there is a high degree of risk attached to our forecast that Mr Maduro will remain in power. In our view, there are two main paths to a change of government: a negotiated transition, or some sort of internal coup. Notwithstanding the potential for increased multilateral engagement, we believe that a negotiated transition would be difficult, as trust issues between the two sides are insurmountable. Bearing this in mind, we believe that the most likely scenario for regime change is an internal coup. The regime's main weakness is the fragility of its internal finances, which are heavily dependent on revenue from PDVSA, the state-owned oil company. The government's patronage system is crucial for sustaining its security apparatus and stamping out social unrest. The regime's finances have already come under severe strain, owing to the combination of extreme macroeconomic mismanagement and US sanctions. Although the regime will continue to benefit from funds from drug-trafficking and illegal mining activities, a lack of hard currency could ultimately prove fatal to the patronage system, and will test the regime's ability to maintain cohesion among its ranks and control over the security apparatus. The regime's liquidity problems-along with the country's deepening socio-economic and human-itarian crisis-could therefore prompt putsch attempts in the near term.
Outlook for 2021-25: Election watch A legislative election was held in December 2020 to select the 277 members of the unicameral National Assembly. The vote, which was boycotted by most opposition parties, was widely regarded as neither free nor fair. The results were therefore unsurprising: the Gran Polo Patriótico, an electoral alliance dominated by the PSUV, won an overwhelming supermajority of 256 seats in the legislature.
Next on the electoral calendar are regional and local elections (to elect governors, mayors and their legislative counterparts), which will take place on November 21st. We believe that the regime will try to use negotiations over electoral conditions as a first step towards gaining international legitimacy and some degree of sanctions relief. However, these efforts are unlikely to yield results, particularly given that the regime is not serious about allowing truly competitive polls that could put its dominance at the subnational level at risk. The PSUV's control of the majority of the CNE board and its unfettered influence over the judicial branch are designed to guard against such an outcome. In addition, the legislature is in the process of approving a law on "communal cities" that could potentially be used to install a parallel governance structure if the opposition's electoral performance surprises on the upside. Despite these issues, some pragmatic members of the opposition are still likely to participate in the November polls in a bid to make inroads into a political system from which they have been shut out. However, we do not expect a shift in the balance of power.
Outlook for 2021-25: International relations The Maduro regime's main foreign policy challenge will be managing its combative ties with the US. The administration led by the former US president, Donald Trump (2017-21), instituted several rounds of crippling oil sanctions as part of a systematic campaign designed to undermine the regime. Although the aggressive sanctions policy did not produce its intended outcome, it did accelerate the decline of Venezuela's oil industry. Mr Maduro will look to reset ties with the US under the current president, Joe Biden, but we expect little progress. US policy towards Venezuela has bipartisan support in the US, and Mr Biden is unlikely to provide significant sanctions relief unless the Maduro regime makes major political compromises and commits to democratic reform (both of which are highly improbable). Any changes to US sanctions policy will therefore be only on humanitarian grounds and aimed at improving the lives of the poorest Venezuelans, as evidenced by recent exemptions granted for coronavirus-related transactions and imports of liquefied petroleum gas.
Russia and China have previously extended major financial support, but this has been scaled back in recent years following non-payment of liabilities by Venezuela. Despite ongoing diplomatic support from both of these countries, and preferential access to their state-developed coronavirus vaccines, neither will be willing to provide game-changing amounts of finance during 2021-25. Instead, Venezuela will continue to rely heavily on Iran, which has become the regime's main international backer, sending its refined petroleum to alleviate the country's severe petrol shortages.
Outlook for 2021-25: Policy trends The Maduro regime's immediate policy priorities will be to contain the public health crisis caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, alleviate ongoing diesel shortages and reverse a long-running economic collapse. However, progress (if any) on each of these goals will be limited.
To combat Covid-19, the government is maintaining its "Fórmula 7+7 Plus" strategy, which involves alternating between a week of tighter restrictions and a week of more relaxed ones. However, this will not prevent fresh waves of the virus, increasing pressure on Venezuela's decrepit medical infrastructure. Meanwhile, the country's vaccine rollout has faced major implementation challenges (as at mid-July only about 10% of the population had received at least one dose). We do not expect that enough doses of the vaccine will be distributed to have a significant impact on local transmission until 2023.
In an effort to address severe diesel shortages, the government has sought to increase domestic output by restarting operations at key refineries. However, the government's fix is not a viable long-term solution, mainly because producing diesel requires light crude, which is in limited supply. To ramp up domestic diesel output, PDVSA has had to cut back on blending operations of heavy crude from the Orinoco oil belt (which is constraining overall production of crude oil). The government has also sought to intermittently import diesel through intermediaries, but it has limited foreign currency to increase its imports on the scale required. As a result, we believe that a long-term remedy will hinge on the Biden administration reinstating exemptions on crude-for-diesel swaps. We believe that this is likely to materialise later this year, but risks to this assumption are high.
Reversing Venezuela's economic decline will be a similarly difficult task. To its credit, the government has managed to circumnavigate risks stemming from a recently imposed, hefty bitumen tax in China. The policy measure was expected to affect demand from independent Chinese refineries for Venezuelan Merey (which is typically rebranded as bitumen mix from Malaysia to bypass US sanctions). However, preliminary data indicate that demand for Venezuelan crude has held up. The opacity surrounding PDVSA's operations makes it difficult to identify the drivers behind the resilience of Venezuela's oil exports. However, several factors are likely to have been at play. First, it is possible that some private Chinese refineries have continued importing Venezuelan crude despite the tax. In the context of strict import quotas, some refineries will have had little option but to continue importing bitumen (which is exempt from quotas) in order to fulfil local feedstock demand. Secondly, it is possible that Chinese state-owned oil firms increased their purchases of Venezuelan crude to supplant lower demand from China's private sector. Thirdly, it is plausible that PDVSA's efforts to seek out new trade partners in Asia and the Middle East are paying off. However, PDVSA is unlikely to be able to boost its output substantially in the near term, given the state of disrepair of local production facilities.
In the medium term, the regime will seek to pave the way for recovery by boosting private investment (given that the public sector is completely overstretched). The regime has promulgated an anti-blockade law, which gives the executive branch the unchecked authority to sign new deals with private firms and countries confidentially (in order to skirt international sanctions), without going through public tender processes. Concurrently, the regime is working on a hydrocarbons reform that would incentivise increased private-sector participation in the oil industry. However, these efforts are unlikely to yield significant results; even assuming that the regime manages to sidestep financial sanctions, it will struggle to attract new investment, given the abysmal business environment and a lack of confidence in the rule of law.
Outlook for 2021-25: Fiscal policy The authorities have not published complete data on the fiscal accounts since 2011. However, we expect that a high level of inefficient current expenditure, combined with an extremely weak revenue intake, will keep the budget deficit wide and the public debt/GDP ratio above 300% throughout the 2021-25 forecast period. The sovereign's default on most of its interest and principal repayments will continue to prevent access to external finance, leaving the regime reliant on monetisation to fund its deficits. Even if the government reaches an agreement with some of its creditors (including China) to restructure debt liabilities in 2021-25, we still expect the public debt burden to remain huge, particularly as considerable off-balance-sheet debt financing-mainly PDVSA-issued debt and development funds-understate the true size of total public liabilities.
Outlook for 2021-25: Monetary policy Monetary policy will remain subservient to fiscal policy as the Banco Central de Venezuela (BCV, the central bank) continues to print money to meet the public sector's financing needs. In recent years the BCV has taken steps to control growth of monetary aggregates. For instance, it lifted the cash reserve ratio (CRR) from 21.5% in late 2018 to 93% in early 2020, although it has relaxed the CRR slightly since that peak, to 85% currently. Far from taming inflation, these measures have led to the complete destruction of private-sector credit, which stands at less than 1% of levels recorded four years ago. These factors have accelerated the trend towards wider use of the US dollar in the economy; almost two-thirds of financial transactions now take place in dollars.
Outlook for 2021-25: Economic growth After an estimated contraction in real GDP of 31% in 2020 (and a cumulative contraction of 77% since 2013), we forecast modest growth of 3.8% in 2021. Real GDP is now strongly correlated with oil production and exports, prospects for which have improved modestly.
Having plummeted to an estimated 500,000 barrels/day in 2020-its lowest level in several decades-we expect oil output to increase marginally to about 520,000 b/d in 2021. There are only 25 active oil rigs in the country, virtually unchanged from last year and substantially below a peak of 95 in early 2012. Moreover, there are limited incentives to bring new rigs online in the near term. At present Venezuela's average (after-tax) break-even price is about US$49/barrel. However, US sanctions on the regime raise the risks involved in dealing with Venezuela, forcing the country to offer a hefty discount on its crude. Therefore, at current market prices (Venezuela's oil basket traded at US$53.5/b in June), there is only a modest profit to be made from new investment.
We expect growth to pick up in 2022, assuming that oil prices remain supportive and that producers continue to adapt to post-sanctions export markets. However, serious operational problems (such as difficulties in obtaining equipment for repairs and finding qualified staff), a limited pool of buyers of Venezuelan crude and the weak long-term fundamentals of the oil market will cause growth to taper off towards the end of our forecast period. The non-oil economy will also make modest gains in 2022-25, assuming that continued dollarisation engenders relative macroeconomic stability. Nonetheless, we expect that Venezuela's GDP (in real terms) will remain below pre-pandemic levels even in 2025.
Outlook for 2021-25: Inflation A severely reduced domestic goods supply, constraints on import capacity and the monetisation of large public deficits will impede the disinflationary process in 2021-25. The regime has shown little inclination to take on the fiscal and macroeconomic reforms that would address the root causes of inflation. It has, however, lent its support to an ongoing process of de facto dollarisation, which will help to ease price pressures over time.
Outlook for 2021-25: Exchange rates Venezuela is poised for its third currency redenomination since 2008. From October 1st the BCV will replace the bolívar soberano with the "bolívar digital". The change will effectively take six zeroes off the currency, as each bolívar digital will be worth 1m bolívar soberanos. Although the measure is ostensibly part of the BCV's pivot to digitisation, the authorities have confirmed that they will still continue to issue fiat money. In our view, the redenomination is largely cosmetic: although it will help to simplify bookkeeping for a while, it will not fundamentally engender confidence in the bolívar. As such, debt monetisation will continue to drive exchange-rate and price instability.
Outlook for 2021-25: External sector Balance-of-payments pressures will remain severe in 2021-25, contributing to goods shortages and economic inequities. Foreign reserves stagnated at US$6.2bn in July-their lowest level in three decades. This steep decline, which has been several years in the making, reflects poor policymaking and a lack of economic diversification in the country's external sector.
Under our baseline forecast, we expect reserves to rise modestly over the forecast period, reaching US$7.8bn by end-2025. We expect this increase to be driven largely by trends on the current account, as Venezuela's access to foreign capital will remain extremely limited. We expect the current-account balance to shift from an estimated deficit of 4.7% of GDP in 2020 to a surplus of 1.2% of GDP in 2021. Thereafter, it will remain in surplus, averaging 2% of GDP in 2022-25. Crucially, our forecasts assume that export earnings will recover from a nadir in 2020. We also expect workers' remittances from abroad to play a significant role in propping up the current-account balance.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
International assumptions
World GDP growth (%) 2.5 3.1 3.0 2.3 -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
US GDP growth (%) 1.7 2.3 3.0 2.2 -3.5 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.0
Latin America growth (%) -1.5 0.9 0.8 -0.5 -7.0 5.6 2.9 2.4 2.3 2.4
World trade growth (%) 2.1 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 8.0 5.6 4.7 4.2 4.3
US CPI (%) 1.3 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
EU27 CPI (%) 0.2 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.0 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
Industrial raw materials export price (%) -2.2 20.2 2.2 -8.6 -3.2 32.7 -1.7 2.2 -9.2 0.8
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 44.0 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (%) 0.5 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6
US$:€ (av) 1.11 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.20 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
¥:€ (av) 120.4 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 129.4 128.6 132.8 135.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Expenditure on GDP (BsS bn at current market prices)
GDP 0.28 2.01 9,823.09 808,657.33 16,178,354.1 228,590,676 2,153,092,552 10,483,212,001 34,583,661,380 71,011,964,975
Private consumption 0.24 2.02 7,239.40 366,313.59 10,494,884.2 194,470,205 2,576,730,217 13,321,695,221 40,897,604,329 86,293,945,135
Government consumption 0.03 0.18 1,651.88 211,102.62 6,216,892.7 115,321,744 1,497,539,875 7,690,510,037 22,824,678,654 46,664,057,419
Gross fixed investment 0.04 0.33 1,586.23 88,386.66 1,775,753.1 33,669,876 511,736,249 2,956,837,486 9,185,899,470 19,239,464,754
Exports of goods & services 0.09 0.62 4,890.63 440,773 5,101,758 108,721,047 1,115,750,533 5,215,408,356 16,470,928,984 31,986,055,473
Imports of goods & services 0.08 0.73 5,353.52 281,193 7,098,661 220,772,680 3,532,182,471 18,660,541,253 54,735,243,145 113,109,743,717
Stockbuilding -0.04 -0.41 -191.53 -16,725 -312,273 -2,819,517 -16,481,852 -40,697,845 -60,206,912 -61,814,090
Domestic demand 0.27 2.12 10,285.98 649,077 18,175,257 340,642,309 4,569,524,490 23,928,344,899 72,847,975,542 152,135,653,218
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 261.9 139.1 97.6 59.7 50.4 53.5 57.7 59.6 60.7 61.6
Private consumption 224.7 139.8 71.9 27.1 32.7 45.5 69.0 75.7 71.7 74.9
Government consumption 24.3 12.5 16.4 15.6 19.4 27.0 40.1 43.7 40.0 40.5
Gross fixed investment 35.3 22.9 15.8 6.5 5.5 7.9 13.7 16.8 16.1 16.7
Exports of goods & services 84.1 42.7 48.6 32.6 15.9 25.5 29.9 29.6 28.9 27.8
Imports of goods & services 71.5 50.7 53.2 20.8 22.1 51.7 94.6 106.1 96.0 98.2
Stockbuilding -35.0 -28.1 -1.9 -1.2 -1.0 -0.7 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1 -0.1
Domestic demand 249.3 147.1 102.2 47.9 56.7 79.8 122.4 136.0 127.8 132.0
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 85.8 100.5 73.7 45.3 64.9 85.1 119.7 127.1 118.3 121.5
Government consumption 9.3 9.0 16.8 26.1 38.4 50.4 69.6 73.4 66.0 65.7
Gross fixed investment 13.5 16.5 16.1 10.9 11.0 14.7 23.8 28.2 26.6 27.1
Stockbuilding -13.4 -20.2 -1.9 -2.1 -1.9 -1.2 -0.8 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1
Exports of goods & services 32.1 30.7 49.8 54.5 31.5 47.6 51.8 49.8 47.6 45.0
Imports of goods & services 27.3 36.4 54.5 34.8 43.9 96.6 164.1 178.0 158.3 159.3
Memorandum items
Oil production ('000 b/d) 2,178 1,925 1,432 a 827 a 505 524 590 620 640 660
National savings ratio (%) -1.4 b 3.1 b 23.6 21.9 4.3 14.7 26.3 30.1 27.5 28.0
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Real expenditure on GDP (BsS m at constant 1997 market prices)
GDP 0.47 0.39 0.32 0.20 0.14 0.14 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.18
Private consumption 0.32 0.27 0.22 0.13 0.10 0.10 0.12 0.12 0.13 0.13
Government consumption 0.10 0.09 0.08 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06
Gross fixed investment 0.07 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
Exports of goods & services 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04
Imports of goods & services 0.09 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.07
Stockbuilding 0.00 -0.02 -0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Domestic demand 0.49 0.38 0.31 0.20 0.16 0.16 0.18 0.19 0.20 0.21
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP -17.0 -15.7 -19.6 -37.3 -31.0 3.8 13.5 5.2 3.2 2.5
Private consumption -19.4 -16.2 -20.1 -38.0 -24.4 2.6 13.3 4.7 3.8 2.8
Government consumption -14.7 -7.2 -9.1 -26.8 -21.0 3.0 11.5 5.0 2.0 2.0
Fixed investment -45.1 -45.3 -37.5 -50.0 -30.0 5.0 30.0 17.0 5.0 2.0
Exports of goods & services -11.7 0.0 -10.8 -27.7 -27.4 3.9 12.8 5.6 3.4 3.2
Imports of goods & services -50.1 -34.7 0.3 -19.0 6.5 3.0 15.0 7.0 4.0 3.0
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -3.6 -2.4 1.9 1.3 1.0 0.8 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.0
Domestic demand -26.3 -21.1 -18.2 -35.7 -23.2 3.6 14.1 5.7 3.4 2.5
Real contribution to growth (%)
Private consumption -13.8 -11.2 -13.8 -26.1 -16.5 1.9 9.8 3.4 2.7 2.0
Government consumption -3.0 -1.5 -2.1 -6.9 -6.3 1.0 3.9 1.7 0.7 0.7
Gross fixed investment -10.5 -7.0 -3.8 -3.9 -1.9 0.3 1.9 1.2 0.4 0.2
External balance 13.9 6.4 -1.8 -1.7 -7.3 -0.2 -2.5 -1.3 -0.7 -0.4
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Origin of GDP (BsS m at constant 1997 prices)
GDP at factor cost 0.47 0.39 0.32 0.20 0.14 0.14 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.18
Agriculture 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.01
Industry 0.15 0.11 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05
Services 0.31 0.27 0.23 0.14 0.09 0.09 0.11 0.11 0.12 0.12
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture -25.8 -16.5 -16.3 -35.0 -30.0 5.0 8.0 3.0 2.5 2.5
Industry 18.2 -23.2 -30.7 -28.0 -20.0 -4.0 12.0 5.0 2.0 1.0
Services -27.0 -12.1 -15.2 -40.5 -35.5 7.8 14.5 5.4 3.7 3.1
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 3.0 2.9 3.1 b 3.2 3.2 3.3 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.0
Industry 31.2 28.4 24.5 b 28.1 32.6 30.1 29.7 29.6 29.3 28.9
Services 65.9 68.7 72.4 b 68.7 64.2 66.6 67.2 67.3 67.7 68.1
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Growth and productivity
Labour productivity growth (% -17.4 -20.2 -22.9 4.6 6.2 0.8 3.2 -1.7 -1.7 0.5
Total factor productivity growth (%) -15.4 -16.9 -19.6 -8.3 -5.2 4.9 10.0 3.5 2.7 4.0
Growth of capital stock (%) -3.1 -4.8 -5.5 -6.2 -6.4 -6.3 -6.1 -5.9 -5.8 -5.7
Growth of potential GDP (%) -15.9 -15.0 -19.0 -27.7 -8.4 0.0 8.6 1.7 0.9 2.1
Growth of GDP (%) -17.0 c -15.7 c -19.6 c -37.3 -31.0 3.8 13.5 5.2 3.2 2.5
Growth of GDP per head (%) -18.1 -16.8 -20.6 -33.3 -31.0 6.6 14.4 6.0 4.0 3.3
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 30.8 b 31.2 b 31.6 29.7 29.7 29.0 28.8 28.5 28.3 28.1
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 261.9 139.1 97.6 59.7 50.4 53.5 57.7 59.6 60.7 61.6
GDP (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 2,072,100 9 92.3 56.3 48.1 52.5 56.6 58.4 59.5 61.0
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 8,500 b 4,457 b 3,086 2,008 1,696 1,848 2,006 2,088 2,142 2,192
GDP per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 67,238,775 275 2,918 1,893 1,616 1,812 1,966 2,047 2,100 2,171
Private consumption (US$ bn) 224.7 139.8 71.9 27.1 32.7 45.5 69.0 75.7 71.7 74.9
Private consumption (US$ bn at parallel exchange rate) 1,777,368 9 68.0 25.5 31.2 44.7 67.7 74.2 70.3 74.2
Private consumption per head (US$) 7,290 b 4,480 b 2,270 910 1,100 1,570 2,400 2,650 2,530 2,660
Private consumption per head (US$ at parallel exchange rate) 57,674,845 276 2,151 858 1,048 1,541 2,353 2,601 2,483 2,638
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 387.8 333.2 274.2 175.1 122.3 128.8 149.5 161.1 169.5 176.8
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 12,580 b 10,670 b 8,670 5,890 4,110 4,450 5,200 5,640 5,980 6,290
Personal disposable income (BsS bn) 0.27 b 2.24 b 8,192.57 444,483.68 11,630,626 201,640,251 2,576,317,663 13,020,958,510 39,104,443,498 81,431,153,962
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 249.6 b 155.3 b 81.4 32.8 36.3 47.2 69.0 74.0 68.6 70.7
Growth of real disposable income (%) -19.4 b -16.2 b -18.6 -33.6 -30.9 -4.0 9.3 2.3 1.5 1.4
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.42 b 0.42 b 0.42 0.39 0.39 0.37 0.37 0.36 0.36 0.36
Share of world GDP (%; market exchange rates) 0.35 0.17 0.11 0.07 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05
Share of world GDP (%; PPP) 0.34 0.28 0.21 0.13 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10
Share of world exports of goods (%) 0.18 0.20 0.18 a 0.10 0.04 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
NFPS expenditure 31.2 40.5 47.9 26.7 20.1 23.6 27.7 27.3 26.9 25.4
Interest 1.1 1.1 1.5 2.3 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.1
Non-interest expenditure 30.1 39.4 46.4 24.4 20.1 23.5 27.5 27.0 26.7 25.3
NFPS revenue 20.4 17.5 16.9 16.7 15.1 16.5 21.4 20.8 20.6 18.3
NFPS balance -10.8 -23.0 -31.0 -10.0 -5.0 -7.1 -6.3 -6.5 -6.3 -7.1
Primary balance -9.7 -21.9 -29.5 -7.7 -5.0 -7.0 -6.1 -6.2 -6.1 -7.0
Government debt 22.9 36.1 180.8 232.8 302.1 317.0 329.0 334.2 343.1 355.2
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (av) 0.0011 0.0144 100.6865 13,537.2700 320,729.26 4,269,390 37,327,574 175,928,166 570,048,680 1,152,117,580
Exchange rate BsS:US$1 (end-period) 0.0022 0.0498 587.8727 44,482.6900 1,067,277.93 10,070,685 76,170,863 308,396,042 839,387,988 1,414,025,489
Parallel exchange rate BsS:US$ (av) 0.0000 0.0002 0.1065 14.3585 336.486 4,354.78 38,074.13 179,446.73 581,449.65 1,163,638.76
Exchange rate BsS:€1 (av) 0.0012 0.0163 118.9601 15,156.3015 366,042.48 5,103,342 43,673,261 201,877,570 669,807,199 1,399,822,859
Exchange rate BsS:€1 (end-period) 0.0023 0.0598 673.1143 49,971.8539 1,309,656.75 11,883,408 88,358,201 354,655,448 1,003,068,645 1,739,251,352
Real effective exchange rate (av) CPI-based 740.6 2,321.8 3,290 4,299 6,811 9,049 11,836 12,103 10,757 10,610
Real effective exchange rate (av) PPI-based 43.6 35.7 49.9 64.9 100.8 136.9 178.8 182.9 163.0 160.6
Real effective exchange rate (av) ULC-based 68.3 56.8 6.1 2.2 2.5 3.5 5.0 5.3 4.8 4.8
Purchasing power parity BsS:US$1 (av) 0.00 c 0.01 c 35.82 4618.13 132,243.12 1,774,479.14 14,405,760 65,092,533 204,043,152 401,586,874
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 150.0 c 1,170.0 c 63,281.9 c 4,945.6 c 1,286.8 c 999.9 844.3 381.7 227.2 104.9
Domestic credit growth (%) 28.5 596.6 118,213.2 2,161.8 1,646.7 1,296.1 1,196.6 403.7 229.1 105.7
Commercial banks' prime rate (%; av) 20.8 c 21.1 c 22.3 c 28.7 c 13.9 c 10.1 9.9 12.2 17.7 18.3
Deposit interest rate (%; av) 15.1 c 14.7 c 14.6 c 30.6 c 52.9 c 39.2 23.6 17.2 14.7 13.3
Money market interest rate (%; av) 3.2 c 0.5 c 5.0 c 110.0 c 182.2 c 230.3 72.5 40.0 27.5 22.5
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 14.3 15.1 15.7 11.5 11.4 10.9 11.0 11.0 11.1 11.1
Labour force (% change) 0.9 5.5 3.9 -26.5 -1.5 -4.2 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.2
Employment (m) 13.3 14.0 14.6 8.8 5.7 5.9 6.5 6.9 7.3 7.4
Employment (% change) -2.0 -10.0 -20.0 -40.0 -35.0 3.0 10.0 7.0 5.0 2.0
Unemployment (m) 1.0 1.1 1.1 2.8 5.7 5.0 4.6 4.1 3.8 3.7
Unemployment rate (%) 7.3 7.2 6.9 24.0 49.8 46.1 41.4 37.5 34.5 33.4
Wage and price inflation (%)
Consumer prices (av) 254.9 982.8 1,005,130.7 17,365.2 3,634.1 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3
Consumer prices (end-period) 274.4 2,581.8 1,699,183.5 7,374.4 3,713.3 1,324.4 966.9 269.2 151.6 90.1
Producer prices (av) 240.9 1,026.0 1,005,130.7 17,365.2 3,634.1 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3
GDP deflator (av) 321.3 c 748.1 c 608,238.7 13,022.7 2,798.2 1,260.6 729.7 362.7 219.7 100.4
Private consumption deflator (av) 333.9 c 899.2 c 448,578.1 8,065.0 3,688.4 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3
Government consumption deflator (av) 292.7 c 646.3 c 1,005,125.2 17,358.4 3,627.8 1,700.9 1,064.6 389.1 191.0 100.4
Fixed investment deflator (av) 267.2 c 1,495.4 c 767,782.5 11,044.2 2,770.1 1,705.8 1,069.1 393.9 195.9 105.3
Average nominal wages 250.0 816.7 58,631.0 5,000.0 2,800.0 1,750.0 1,215.0 410.0 202.0 109.0
Average real wages -1.4 -15.3 -94.2 -70.8 -22.3 2.4 12.5 3.3 2.1 1.8
Unit labour costs (BsS-based) 323.7 1,048.7 76,072.1 4,777.9 2,630.7 1,734.9 1,174.2 418.6 207.3 108.0
Unit labour costs (US$-based) -11.9 -14.7 -89.1 -63.7 15.3 37.8 45.7 10.0 -5.2 2.9
Labour costs per hour (BsS m) 0.00000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0007 0.02 0.4 5.1 25.8 77.9 162.8
Labour costs per hour (US$) 2.4 1.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2016 a 2017 b 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -3.9 9.5 a 9.2 a 7.8 -2.4 0.6 1.9 1.4 0.6 0.6
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -1.5 6.8 a 9.4 13.0 -4.7 1.2 3.3 2.3 1.1 1.0
Goods: exports fob 27.4 34.0 a 33.7 a 19.3 6.1 11.3 14.0 14.2 13.5 13.2
Goods: imports fob -16.3 -12.0 a -12.8 a -6.7 -7.9 -10.5 -12.3 -13.0 -12.8 -12.5
Trade balance 11.1 22.0 a 20.9 a 12.6 -1.7 0.8 1.7 1.2 0.8 0.6
Services: credit 1.3 1.1 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7
Services: debit -9.5 -6.7 -6.4 -5.4 -3.5 -3.6 -4.2 -4.8 -5.2 -5.4
Services balance -8.2 -5.6 a -5.7 a -5.0 -3.2 -3.2 -3.8 -4.3 -4.6 -4.7
Primary income: credit 0.6 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6
Primary income: debit -7.5 -8.2 -8.9 -4.0 -2.1 -2.4 -2.7 -2.9 -3.4 -3.5
Primary income balance -6.9 -7.6 a -8.0 a -3.6 -1.9 -2.2 -2.2 -2.3 -2.7 -2.9
Secondary income: credit 0.6 0.8 2.3 3.8 4.5 5.3 6.3 6.9 7.3 7.7
Secondary income: debit -0.5 -0.2 -0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Secondary income balance 0.2 0.6 a 2.0 a 3.8 4.5 5.3 6.2 6.9 7.3 7.6
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 90.0 b 45.7 58.2 54.0 36.3 56.0 58.2 54.7 51.6 48.0
Export prices (% change) -28.0 b -49.2 27.4 -7.3 -32.8 54.1 4.0 -6.1 -5.7 -6.9
Import price index (US$-based; 2005=100) 254.2 b 275.9 288.5 139.0 139.1 315.5 502.0 525.9 457.8 454.4
Import prices (% change) -37.0 b 8.5 4.6 -51.8 0.1 126.9 59.1 4.8 -13.0 -0.7
Terms of trade (2005=100) 35.4 b 16.6 20.2 38.9 26.1 17.7 11.6 10.4 11.3 10.6
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 2.2 b 7.5 6.0 -1.2 -7.8 11.1 6.2 6.1 5.1 3.6
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2016 a 2017 b 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment 1.6 -0.1 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.9
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 0.6 0.0 0.9 1.6 1.1 1.1 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.5
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 4.5 -0.3 5.6 14.3 9.6 7.3 5.8 5.4 5.9 5.5
Outward direct investment -1.0 -2.2 -0.7 -0.7 -0.5 -0.6 -0.6 -0.6 -0.7 -0.7
Net foreign direct investment 0.5 -2.3 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2
Stock of inward direct investment 30.2 30.1 31.0 31.9 32.5 33.0 33.8 34.7 35.7 36.6
Stock of inward direct investment per head (US$) 979.2 964.4 980.4 1,073.3 1,091.1 1,140.0 1,176.5 1,216.9 1,259.6 1,302.0
Stock of inward direct investment (% of GDP) 11.5 21.6 31.8 53.4 64.3 61.7 58.7 58.3 58.8 59.4
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.06 0.00 0.18 0.07 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.11 0.10 0.10 0.09 0.10 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.08
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2016 a 2017 b 2018 b 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 163.9 164.6 a 167.8 a 168.1 a 161.7 165.7 170.1 174.9 175.9 176.8
Total external debt (% of GDP) 62.6 b 118.3 172.0 281.4 320.5 309.5 294.9 293.4 289.9 286.9
Total external debt (% of GDP, at parallel exchange rate) 0.0 1,919.2 a 181.9 a 298.4 a 336.3 315.7 300.8 299.3 295.7 289.8
Debt/exports ratio (%) 557.0 458.8 468.9 801.5 2,142.4 1,283.4 1,046.0 1,047.5 1,084.3 1,102.9
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 4.3 3.6 3.5 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.6 3.1 3.7
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data sources and definitions Sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data; The Economist Intelligence Unit is the source for all forecast data unless otherwise stated
Global data Oil prices: dated Brent
US and OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
US and OECD growth: OECD
US 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
US$ effective exchange rate: IMF, IFS; nominal weighted index
World trade growth: Economist Intelligence Unit aggregate
Domestic data Balance of payments, exchange and interest rates: IMF, IFS
Budget balance: non-financial public sector
Commercial banks' prime lending rate: average nominal interest rate charged on loans to agriculture
Deposit interest rate: average nominal interest rate on 90-day term deposits
Exchange rate: IMF, IFS; market rates expressed as BsS:US$
External debt; World Bank, International Debt Statistics
GDP: at constant 1997 prices, BCV
Inflation: BCV, consumer price index (1997=100) for the Caracas metropolitan area
Labour market statistics: derived from a series given in ILO, Yearbook of Labour Statistics
Oil production and export volumes: Bloomberg
Population: Centro Latinoamericano y Caribeño de Demografía (Celade, Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre)
Social indicators: World Bank, World Development Indicators
Stock of foreign investment: IMF, IFS; UNCTAD, World Investment Report
Abbreviations BCV: Banco Central de Venezuela (the central bank)
IFS: International Financial Statistics
ILO: International Labour Organisation
UNCTAD: UN Conference on Trade and Development

Subject: Tax rates; Local elections; Legislatures; Foreign exchange rates; Electricity distribution; Politics; Sanctions; Foreign investment; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Patronage; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Economists; Petroleum production; Tax reform; Wage & price controls; Labor market; COVID-19; Economic forecasts; Contempt of court; Economic crisis

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Foreign exchange rates Sanctions Foreign investment International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Economists Petroleum production Tax reform Wage & price controls Labor market Economic forecasts Economic crisis; Industry: 92112 :‎ Legislative Bodies

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Company / organization: Name: Economist Intelligence Unit; NAICS: 516210

Classification: 92112: Legislative Bodies

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Forecast Venezuela August 2021 Updater

Publication title: Country Forecast. Venezuela; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Political Science, Business And Economics

ISSN: 09669574

e-ISSN: 20489773

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611016520

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-venezuela-august-2021-updater/docview/2611016520/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Montenegro 3rd Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-montenegro-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2625456182/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Montenegro&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Montenegro+3rd+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-09&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Montenegro&amp;rft.issn=17564301&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Montenegro; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Montenegro; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Montenegro 3rd Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Montenegro; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 17564301

e-ISSN: 20475772

Sourcetype: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2625456182

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-montenegro-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2625456182/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-02-05

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Bulgaria 3rd Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-bulgaria-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2625455998/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Bulgaria&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Bulgaria+3rd+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-09&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Bulgaria&amp;rft.issn=1366400X&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Bulgaria; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Bulgaria; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Bulgaria 3rd Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Bulgaria; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 1366400X

e-ISSN: 2047444X

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2625455998

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-bulgaria-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2625455998/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-02-05

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Forecast Chile August 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-chile-august-2021/docview/2611016489/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: Economic outlook 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Real GDP growth (%) -6.0 7.5 2.7 2.5 2.4 2.4 Consumer price inflation (av, %) 3.0 3.6 3.0 2.7 2.8 2.8 Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.3 -7.1 -5.9 -5.0 -3.5 -2.6 Current-account balance (% of GDP) 1.3 -0.4 -0.8 -1.1 -2.2 -2.5 Money market rate (av; %) 0.5 0.8 1.8 2.3 2.8 3.3 Exchange rate Ps:US$ (av) 792.2 726.6 740.0 736.0 721.9 715.6 Chile's economy is set to recover its 2020 pandemic-related losses fully in 2021, making it one of the fastest in the region to do so. [...]the dependency ratio has been rising and stood at 46% in 2020. Long-term outlook 2021-30 2031-50 2021-50 Growth and productivity (% change; annual av) Growth of real GDP per head 2.9 2.0 2.3 Growth of real GDP 3.0 2.2 2.5 Labour productivity growth 1.8 2.4 2.2 Broad consensus in favour of generally orthodox monetary and fiscal policies will underpin long-term economic growth, but challenges from new left-wing political parties are a risk, as are potential policy shifts resulting from the ongoing constitutional reform process. Fact sheet Annual data 2020a Historical averages (%) 2016-20 Population (m) 19.1 Population growth 1.2 GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 253.0b Real GDP growth 0.3 GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 468.9 Real domestic demand growth 0.2 GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 13,234 Inflation 2.7 GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 24,527 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -2.1 Exchange rate (av) Ps:US$ 792.2b FDI inflows (% of GDP) 3.5 a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Actual.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Forecast.+Chile&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Forecast+Chile+August+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-02&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Forecast.+Chile&amp;rft.issn=09669310&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: - Sebastián Piñera of the centre-right Chile Vamos coalition became president in March 2018. A more proportional electoral system that came into effect in 2017 challenged the traditional dominance of centre-left and centre-right coalitions; no coalition has a majority in either house of Congress, resulting in legislative gridlock. The need for consensus-building has kept policy centrist, but leftist politicians gained prominence after social protests in 2019. This shift was reflected in May in elections for the constituent assembly and regional posts, and will give rise to policies that are more socially oriented and that prioritise community use of natural resources over industrial use. Despite this, The Economist Intelligence Unit expects a centrist to win the November 2021 presidential election and does not envisage constitutional reform efforts leading to a paradigm shift in policy.

Chile--highlights: Business environment outlook                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.36 7.60 25 23 1 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

- Chile retains first position in Latin America in our business environment rankings in the 2021-25 forecast period and improves moderately in the global rankings. However, there is an unusually high degree of uncertainty attached to this forecast, particularly relating to polarised general election due in November and a process to rewrite the constitution. The growing influence of the political left has raised concerns about possible radical populist measures being included in the new text. Our baseline forecast is that a centrist will win the presidency and that constitutional reforms will be fairly moderate, explaining why Chile's rankings are still strong. The country's open foreign investment regime, a broadly level playing field, open trading relationships, and deep and sophisticated capital markets will remain strong aspects of its business environment. However, a more radical than anticipated shift in policy would undermine its scores.

Chile--highlights: Economic outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Real GDP growth (%) -6.0 7.5 2.7 2.5 2.4 2.4
Consumer price inflation (av, %) 3.0 3.6 3.0 2.7 2.8 2.8
Budget balance (% of GDP) -7.3 -7.1 -5.9 -5.0 -3.5 -2.6
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 1.3 -0.4 -0.8 -1.1 -2.2 -2.5
Money market rate (av; %) 0.5 0.8 1.8 2.3 2.8 3.3
Exchange rate Ps:US$ (av) 792.2 726.6 740.0 736.0 721.9 715.6

- Chile's economy is set to recover its 2020 pandemic-related losses fully in 2021, making it one of the fastest in the region to do so. A large capacity for fiscal stimulus (owing to long-standing fiscal prudence) and a rapid vaccine rollout will drive the recovery. Public debt will rise on the back of successive fiscal deficits but will remain manageable in 2021-25. Inflation will be well contained within the central bank's 2-4% target range. Despite uncertainty about the constitutional reform process, the quality of policymaking should remain reasonable, and the country should retain strong institutional underpinnings.

Chile--highlights: Demographic outlook Population (m) 2015 2020 2025
Total 18.0 19.1 19.2
 Male 8.8 9.4 9.5
 Female 9.1 9.7 9.7
Period averages (%)   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth   1.2 0.1
Working-age population growth   1.0 -0.3
Labour force growth   1.9 0.4

- At an estimated 19.1m in 2020, Chile's small population is growing, but at a slower rate than most of its neighbours. The birth rate has fallen steadily over the last two decades, from 15.8 per 1,000 people in 2000-05, to 13.2 per 1,000 in the 2016-20 historical period. Chile also has an older demographic profile than most in the region, with those aged 65 years and over accounting for more than 11.8% of the total population in 2020-a proportion that is set to rise to 14.1% by 2025. As a result, the dependency ratio has been rising and stood at 46% in 2020. The labour force is forecast to grow by an annual average of 0.4% in 2021-25. Health indicators are broadly comparable with those of other OECD economies.

Chile--highlights: Market opportunities   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 253.0 297.4 307.4 327.3 353.2 379.3
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 13,234 15,478 15,969 17,005 18,360 19,714
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 163.3 194.3 205.7 222.2 244.0 264.8
Household consumption (US$ bn) 149.2 175.5 184.7 198.7 217.4 235.3
Household consumption per head (US$) 7,800 9,130 9,600 10,320 11,300 12,230

- Growth in private consumption on the back of fiscal stimulus will boost import demand, especially for consumer goods. Ample government infrastructure concessions, expansion in the renewables sector and investment in new technologies will provide opportunities. Chile's market opportunities are limited by its fairly small population, but free-market policies, relative political stability and effective economic management will continue to attract investment.

Chile--highlights: Long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 2.9 2.0 2.3
Growth of real GDP 3.0 2.2 2.5
Labour productivity growth 1.8 2.4 2.2

- Broad consensus in favour of generally orthodox monetary and fiscal policies will underpin long-term economic growth, but challenges from new left-wing political parties are a risk, as are potential policy shifts resulting from the ongoing constitutional reform process. Free-trade agreements within and outside the region will help to attract foreign investment. We expect average annual GDP growth to reach 3% in 2021-30, slowing to 2.2% in 2031-50. The capital stock will continue to grow, with investment reaching 22.8% of GDP by 2050.

Fact sheet Annual data 2020 a Historical averages (%) 2016-20
Population (m) 19.1 Population growth 1.2
GDP (US$ bn; market exchange rate) 253.0 b Real GDP growth 0.3
GDP (US$ bn; purchasing power parity) 468.9 Real domestic demand growth 0.2
GDP per head (US$; market exchange rate) 13,234 Inflation 2.7
GDP per head (US$; purchasing power parity) 24,527 Current-account balance (% of GDP) -2.1
Exchange rate (av) Ps:US$ 792.2 b FDI inflows (% of GDP) 3.5
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Actual.
Background: In 1988 the military ruler, Augusto Pinochet, lost a referendum that would have allowed him to stay in office. Instead, the centre-left Concertación de Partidos por la Democracia coalition (later Nueva Mayoría-NM) won the December 1989 general election and the next four presidential elections. A realignment of forces helped the centre-right t0 win the 2010 election. Since then, there has been alternation between governments on the right and the left. Michelle Bachelet of the NM, who was first elected president in 2006-10 before being succeeded by Sebastián Piñera (2010-14), was re-elected in 2013. Ms Bachelet was again succeeded by Mr Piñera, who took office in March 2018.
Political structure: The political system is presidential, with a bicameral legislature comprising a 43-seat Senate (the upper house) and a 155-seat Chamber of Deputies (the lower house). Presidential terms are four years, and consecutive re-election is not permitted. This structure could change-possibly towards a more prime-ministerial model-as part of an ongoing constitutional reform. The judiciary is independent, but the executive exerts some influence by nominating temporary judges and controlling promotions to the Supreme Court. Chile has 15 regions, 54 provinces and 346 municipalities.
Policy issues: Chilean economic policy-based on free-market principles-has prioritised free trade, a liberal investment regime and market competition (with minimal red tape and restrictions to entry). Fiscal and monetary policymaking has been prudent, supported by strong institutions such as the Banco Central de Chile (BCCh, the central bank), which directs monetary policy based on an inflation-targeting regime. Expansionary fiscal, monetary and credit policies were implemented to contain the hit to the economy and financial system from the coronavirus pandemic in 2020. The BCCh began monetary tightening in July, raising its benchmark rate by 50 basis points, from a technical minimum of 0.25%.
Taxation: Corporate income tax is assessed at two stages. Declared profit is subject to a 27% first-category tax (FCIT). When profit is distributed to shareholders or partners, a 35% second-category tax applies, minus a credit for FCIT. The tax rate on dividends and interest payments to non-banks is 35%. Royalties and fees transferred abroad are subject to a 30-35% withholding tax. Value-added tax (VAT) is levied at 19%.
Foreign trade: The general import tariff rate is 6%, but the trade-weighted effective average rate is less than 2%, owing to preferences granted through trade accords. In 2019 goods exports totalled US$73.5bn; goods imports stood at US$55.1bn.

Major exports 2020 % of total Major imports 2020 % of total
Copper 52.9 Intermediate goods 50.3
Fresh fruit 7.9 Consumer goods 27.6
Salmon & trout 5.5 Capital goods 22.1
Cellulose 3.7    
       
Leading markets 2020 % of total Leading suppliers 2020 % of total
China 39.8 China 27.8
US 13.5 US 17.8
Japan 8.9 Brazil 7.3
South Korea 5.8 Argentina 5.6
Political outlook: Political forces at a glance Sebastián Piñera of the centre-right Chile Vamos (CV) coalition, who served as president in 2010-14, won the December 2017 run-off and took office in March 2018. The CV is chiefly composed of the conservative Unión Demócrata Independiente (UDI), the centre-right Renovación Nacional (Mr Piñera's party) and the smaller, more moderate Evolución Política (Evópoli). No coalition has a majority in the Chamber of Deputies (the lower house) or the Senate (the upper house); the CV holds the most seats in the lower house (71 out of 155) but has only 16 of the 43 seats in the Senate, where the centre-left Unidad Constituyente (UC) coalition has the most seats (21). The UC is composed of parties of the former Concertación coalition, which governed in 1990-2010. After the last presidential and legislative elections, the left-wing Frente Amplio (FA) emerged as the third-largest force in Congress. The FA formed an electoral coalition, Apruebo Dignidad (AD), with Chile Digno-a group of far-left parties including the Partido Comunista (PC)-in preparation for the May constituent assembly election and the next presidential election, due on November 21st.
Given its lack of a legislative majority, the CV has relied on other coalitions or dissident opposition members to pass legislation, which has kept policymaking broadly centrist. However, future policymaking will depend on the results of the November 21st legislative elections. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects the UC to perform best, partly because of its strong results in the regional elections (which serve as a bellwether for the main elections) and partly because of the constitutional reform process (which we expect to result in a more left-leaning constitution than the current one).
Parliamentary forces
(no. of seats)
  Senate Chamber of Deputies
Chile Vamos 16 71
 Renovación Nacional 6 31
 Unión Demócrata Independiente 9 25
 Evolución Política 1 6
 Independents 0 8
Unidad Constituyente 21 43
 Partido Socialista 7 17
 Partido por la Democracia 7 8
 Democracia Cristiana 5 12
 Partido Radical 0 5
 Partido Progresista 2 0
Frente Amplio 1 13
 Revolución Democrática 1 6
 Convergencia Social 0 4
 Others 0 3
Chile Digno 0 13
 Partido Comunista 0 9
 Others 0 4
Nuevo Trato 0 4
Independents (unaligned) 5 12
Total 43 155
Political outlook: Political stability Chilean politics in 2021-22 will be defined by the process to rewrite the constitution, the presidential and legislative elections scheduled for November, and a referendum in the second half of 2022 that gives voters the final say on the approval of the new constitution. Looking ahead to the rest of the forecast period, The Economist Intelligence Unit expects that politics will be dominated by the aftermath of what is likely to be a highly polarised constitutional reform process. Our baseline scenario is that voters will approve the new constitution in next year's referendum. That said, there are risks to this forecast, such as if the new constitution is too far left politically. If this is the case, we believe that voters will narrowly reject the new constitution and the current one will remain in place. In this scenario, political instability is likely to rise as politics will become even more polarised and a wave of large-scale protests may occur. This would pose major governability challenges for the next administration.
In the short term, politics will be dominated by the constituent assembly negotiations and the presidential campaign. On July 4th the 155-seat constituent assembly began negotiations; currently the deliberations are focused on finalising the assembly's rules. We believe that most of the existent rules, especially the one-third of seats (52) required to block reforms from entering the new constitution, will remain in place. Thereafter, discussions will centre on social and economic issues-including education, healthcare, pensions, environmental regulations and mining-over the coming months. Owing to the dominance of the left, and the ruling centre-right CV only able to win 37 seats, the proposed constitutional reforms are likely to increase the role of the state in the economy and propose populist spending increases. A risk is that the proposed reforms may be more statist and populist than we currently envisage, as the negotiations will be occurring in parallel with the presidential and legislative elections scheduled for November.
We expect the CV to try to forge alliances with independents within the assembly in a bid to secure 52 seats. However, we believe that this will be very difficult, as the only right-leaning independent grouping (Independientes No Neutrales) holds just 11 seats, and independents tend to be critical of the traditional parties. We believe that the CV will have more success in building ad hoc coalitions with the centre-left to veto the most radical proposals. Although we do not expect the constitutional reform process to challenge political stability in the immediate term, there are significant risks that divisive negotiations or the CV successfully blocking reforms will raise the probability of politically destabilising social unrest. We also expect that the constitutional reform process will play an important role in the presidential campaign. We expect that presidential candidates on both the left and right will seek to mobilise their base by raising the stakes of the negotiations, likely worsening Chile's already polarised politics.
Political outlook: Political and institutional effectiveness Chile's system of government has been considered the most effective and technically adept in Latin America, owing in part to a relatively strong degree of political stability and a highly professional bureaucracy. Although political stability took a hit when social protests broke out in October 2019, it has improved in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic; despite lingering volatility in the political environment, Chile remains one of the most politically stable countries in the region. Following its peaceful transition to democracy in 1990, Chile has operated the open and liberal economic model instituted under the military regime of Augusto Pinochet (1973-90). This has strengthened the business environment and improved its attractiveness to foreign investment.
The most recent legislative elections, held in 2017 under new electoral rules, resulted in a fractured Congress where no coalition holds a majority. Although this slowed the legislative process, it also gave way to consensus policymaking, which has kept policies broadly centrist. However, the fractured composition of the legislature is likely to change following the November 2021 legislative elections, as we expect centre-left (and to a lesser extent, leftist) candidates to perform much better than centre-right ones. This expectation is based on the left's strong performance in the May constituent assembly and regional elections; we anticipate that the next Congress will be more left-leaning than the current one. Furthermore, a left-dominated assembly is in the process of redrafting the constitution. The new text is likely to contain some reforms-such as raising the tax burden on mining companies or limiting the industrial use of water (which would hurt dependent industries like agriculture and mining)-that could raise operating costs and impair the business environment, assuming that the proposals are approved at a subsequent referendum. There is also the risk of a far-left candidate winning the presidency in November, which would result in more dramatic policy shifts than we have currently pencilled in.
Political engagement and turnout remain low, although a bill to reinstate mandatory voting is making its way through Congress and is likely to be approved before the November election; this should improve turnout in the future. Corruption in Chile remains low, even by OECD standards. According to the 2020 Corruption Perceptions Index prepared by Transparency International (a global anti-corruption watchdog), Chile is the 25th least corrupt country in the world-a rank that it shares with the US. Despite several prominent scandals in recent years, the scale of wrongdoing is not as severe as that uncovered in scandals in other Latin American countries, and public prosecutors have so far proven energetic in bringing a number of perpetrators to account.
According to InSight Crime, a regional investigative organisation, Chile's homicide rate is one of the lowest in Latin America, at 3.7 homicides per 100,000 people in 2020. The judicial system is relatively efficient and transparent. The criminal justice system was modernised over a period of six years, following reforms in 1999 that created an office of public prosecutions and established a legal aid service, as well as a new code for penal procedures. Chile ranks highly in most measures of rule of law, protection of private property and overall institutional effectiveness.
Political outlook: Election watch Chile will experience a busy election period with major implications for policy. Presidential and legislative elections are scheduled for November 21st, with a likely presidential run-off election on December 19th. In the second half of 2022 a referendum will be held to approve the new constitution.
The presidential race will be the most uncertain in many years, owing to a high level of anti-establishment sentiment that we expect will make voters less tied to partisan allegiances than in the past. On July 18th the leftist AD and the centre-right CV held presidential primaries, which led to the unexpected victories of political moderates within their respective coalitions: Gabriel Boric for the AD and Sebastián Sichel for CV. Mr Boric's defeat of the front-runner, Daniel Jadue of the far-left Partido Comunista, was the biggest upset of the primaries. Mr Boric's victory is seen as a result of him being a relatively new face to politics with more moderate policies than Mr Jadue. Mr Sichel's defeat of the two-time presidential candidate and front-runner, Joaquín Lavín of the right-wing UDI, was less surprising, as he had been rising in the polls. Mr Sichel's victory signalled that CV voters were also looking for a new face in the form of a candidate with more moderate messaging and policies.
The centre-left UC coalition did not participate in the primaries. On July 23rd the president of the Senate, Yasna Provoste of the centre-left Partido Demócrata Cristiano announced that she would be running to become the UC's presidential candidate. It is unclear whether the UC will hold a primary, as Paula Narváez of the centre-left Partido Socialista has also declared her candidacy for the UC. Regardless, we expect that Ms Provoste will become the UC's candidate for the presidency.
We expect there to be a second-round election and the most likely match-up will be between Mr Sichel and Ms Provoste. We expect Ms Provoste to be the winner, as Mr Sichel would be representing the CV (the party of the unpopular administration of Mr Piñera), whereas Ms Provoste would seek a greater increase in the state's provision of social services than Mr Sichel. Our forecast assumes that Ms Provoste will make it to the second round, as her more moderate policies and rhetoric will reassure centrist voters who are likely to be unnerved by Mr Boric's more radical policies and strident political stances. If the race polarises voters more than we anticipate, Mr Boric will have a greater chance of making it to the second round; however, in this scenario we would expect Mr Sichel to defeat Mr Boric, as centrist voters would coalesce behind Mr Sichel.
Political outlook: International relations We expect that Chile's commitment to free trade will remain a foreign policy priority. In 2020 the Piñera government signed trade agreements with Brazil and Ecuador. We expect Chile-China relations to remain strong as China is Chile's largest trading partner. In the near term, bilateral co-operation will revolve around controlling the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. Chile has secured a deal to obtain 60m vaccine doses from Sinovac, a Chinese biopharmaceutical company. In the longer term, bilateral efforts will focus on technological innovation and improving the digital economy.
Business environment outlook: Business environment rankings Business environment rankings a
  Value of index b   Global rank c   Regional rank d  
  2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
Overall position 7.36 7.60 25 23 1 1
Political environment 8.1 7.4 14 21 1 1
 Political stability 8.5 7.4 13 29 1 2
 Political effectiveness 7.8 7.4 16 21 1 1
Macroeconomic environment 8.0 7.8 12 15 1 2
Market opportunities 3.9 5.8 63 53 4 5
Policy towards private enterprise & competition 8.5 7.8 8 19 1 1
Policy towards foreign investment 9.6 9.6 3 3 1 1
Foreign trade & exchange controls 8.7 8.7 28 22 2 2
Taxes 7.4 7.4 18 23 1 1
Financing 8.1 8.5 8 8 1 1
The labour market 6.5 6.4 28 41 2 3
Infrastructure 6.3 7.3 35 29 1 1
Technological readiness 6.1 7.2 43 36 1 1
a See Guide to the business rankings model at the end of this report. b Out of 10. c Out of 82 countries. d  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Chile's business environment rankings (BER) have traditionally been fairly stable, with low risks to the outlook. The foreign-investment regime is one of the world's most liberal; together with generally sound regulation, political and economic stability, a well-qualified labour force, strong rule of law, low crime rates and a wide network of free-trade agreements (FTAs), foreign direct investment (FDI) has been strong. These factors made Chile the region's strongest performer by some margin in the historical period (2016-20) and put it within the top third globally, alongside many European and Asian economies.
However, there is an unusually high degree of uncertainty about how Chile's investment climate will evolve in the 2021-25 forecast period owing to the November presidential election and an ongoing constitutional reform process. The body responsible for drawing up a new constitution is dominated by the left, and reforms are likely to focus on increasing state provision in some sectors. Tougher operating conditions (in the form of higher taxes and a tighter regulatory framework) are likely in the important mining sector.
The Economist Intelligence Unit's baseline forecast is that the new constitution will include measures that erode the investment climate only moderately (and only in certain sectors). The need to secure public approval via an exit referendum will probably serve as a backstop and protect against overly radical measures that would cause more damage to the business environment (such as wholesale nationalisation of key sectors). As for the presidential election, we expect that a centrist (such as Yasna Provoste) has a higher chance of winning than a far-left candidate (such as Gabriel Boric), which should ensure broad policy continuity. Moreover, constitutional reforms will be implemented through specific legislation, which will only happen after (and if) the constitution is ratified in the exit referendum. In most cases, foreign firms are unlikely to see significant changes to the operating climate until the second half of the forecast period. These factors explain why Chile's scores remain strong in 2021-25.
However, there are risks to this forecast. Mr Boric could gain momentum in what has been a highly unpredictable race; if he wins, he could press ahead with populist reforms even before the assembly has unveiled the new constitution. A Boric presidency would also presage a break with the orthodox economic model that has long supported Chile's business environment. There is also a risk that the public will not ratify the new constitution; in that case, the current constitution would remain in place, but public anger would grow, raising the risk of more marked instability than is usual in Chile.


Enlarge this image.
Business environment outlook: Chile's business environment at a glance Policy towards private enterprise and competition 2021-22: Pro-business tax reforms (except those aimed at small businesses) take a back seat amid fiscal consolidation efforts and a social agenda.
2023-25: Reforms in new constitution introduce greater state control in some sectors, such as electricity and mining. Stricter conditions imposed on mining concessionaires, limiting scope for entry of new firms.
Policy towards foreign investment 2021-22: Despite risks from constitutional reform, investment regime remains liberal. Investment promotion agency maintains investor-friendly policies, focusing on areas in which Chile has a competitive advantage.
2023-25: Network of bilateral double-taxation and investment protection accords widens. Outward investment grows.
Foreign trade and exchange controls 2021-22: Narrow import-tariff dispersion (0-6%) and free capital flows owing to multiple free-trade agreements (FTAs).
2023-25: Export development still a policy priority; government moves to diversify trade away from reliance on US and China.
Taxes 2021-22: Constitutional reform increases tax burden on some sectors, including mining. Social security contributions rise.
2023-25: Higher tax burden on large business in certain productive sectors to finance social agenda.
Financing 2021-22: Government-backed loan guarantees available. Domestic long-term interest rates are high and bank lending practices are conservative. Large firms retain reasonable access to bond markets.
2023-25: Further measures to facilitate financing for small businesses, particularly new ventures.
The labour market 2021-22: Reforms to increase minimum wages reduce working hours and other forms of labour protection will be an important subject of constitutional reform. Trade unions will remain strong.
2023-25: New constitution leads to education reforms that guarantee universal access and improve quality of public education.
Infrastructure 2021-22: Generally good telecommunications; technological infrastructure expanded further. Investment in power generation and highway network continues, but energy sector remains vulnerable to shortages.
2023-25: Transport infrastructure upgraded through concessions. New energy investment comes onstream following connection between north and central grids, benefiting expansion of non-conventional renewable sources.
Technological readiness 2021-22: Government-backed "Start-Up Chile" programme continues to attract small technology firms.
2023-25: Government focuses on upgrading digital infrastructure, including rural broadband and public WiFi hotspots. 5G services launched.
Business environment outlook: Macroeconomic environment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.0 7.8 12 15 1 2
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Chile's macroeconomic environment deteriorates slightly in 2021-25, both in terms of its underlying score and its global and regional rankings. However, the decline will be relatively moderate, and this will remain a comparatively strong area of the country's business environment. Although Chile's economy suffered from the coronavirus pandemic in 2020, with real GDP contracting by 6%, it will recover more rapidly than most countries in the region; we expect the economy to recoup its losses in full in 2021. A greater capacity for fiscal stimulus (owing to a long-running prudent fiscal stance and the existence of two sovereign wealth funds that provide fiscal cushion) and speedy progress in rolling out Covid-19 vaccines will be the two main factors spurring recovery in the near term. However, fiscal stimulus measures will lift public debt from an annual average of 26.2% of GDP in 2016-20 to 41.1% of GDP in the forecast period. Although this is still manageable, the increase is the main reason behind the drop in Chile's underlying score for macroeconomic environment.

- Other areas of the macroeconomic environment will remain favourable. Although inflation will increase in 2021, it will do so less sharply than in many other countries in the region, reflecting a more effective monetary-policy transmission mechanism (which in turn reflects higher credit penetration). Moreover, we expect inflation to subside relatively swiftly in 2022-25. The external accounts will remain comfortable, with a growing but small current-account deficit and ample liquidity cover (both in terms of foreign reserves and savings held in sovereign wealth funds). Average global copper prices are set to be nearly 20% higher in 2021-25 than in 2016-20, which will ease (but by no means eliminate) the risk of exchange-rate and asset-price volatility. Despite uncertainty about the constitutional reform process, we expect the quality of policymaking to remain reasonable and Chile to retain strong institutional underpinnings. The Banco Central de Chile (BCCh, the central bank) has been independent for more than 30 years, and its autonomy is unlikely to come under threat in the forecast period. The BCCh is complemented by an efficient banking supervisory body, the Superintendencia de Bancos e Instituciones Financieras, which has helped to maintain a modern and well-capitalised banking sector.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards private enterprise and competition                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.5 7.8 8 19 1 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Chile remains the highest-ranked country in Latin America for policy towards private enterprise and competition, but its underlying score deteriorates in the forecast period, resulting in an 11-place drop in the global rankings. After decades of consistent market-friendly policy and reforms, the combined impact of the pandemic and the process to rewrite the constitution is increasing demands for a greater state role in the economy. Broadly speaking, Chile's economy will remain market-based, with low restrictions and minimal red tape, but the state will pay a more prominent role than it has done for several decades. This is likely to be most evident in the provision and management of pensions, which have until now been held in privately managed individual pension accounts. We expect the new constitution to uproot the system of private pension fund managers and replace it with a public system. We also anticipate that the new constitution will introduce more stringent regulations in some areas (possibly relating to private-sector mining concessions) and that the state will take on more of a role in providing some utilities (such as water).
De-privatisation is unlikely
- Following various privatisation programmes-mostly in the late 1980s under the military regime of Augusto Pinochet (1973-90)-the state directly controls only a handful of companies (most notably Codelco, the world's largest copper producer) and held stakes in another 22 businesses as at end-2020. We do not expect the authorities to reverse this policy stance in most areas, but there are some sectors where private-sector companies could find it significantly more difficult to operate in 2021-25. The water sector is particularly at risk. Following a prolonged and severe drought, water shortages have meant that the question of provision has taken centre stage in the constitutional reform debate, with some calls for de-privatising or nationalising the sector. We currently believe that complete nationalisation is unlikely, but the new constitution is at least likely to assign water as a national good for public use (it is already embedded as such in the Water Code but is not a constitutional right) and establish mechanisms that prioritise human consumption over industrial use.

State control over natural resources and utilities will increase
- The state is also likely to take a more assertive role in terms of regulating the mining sector as a result of constitutional reform provisions. At this early stage the changes remain unclear, but they could involve increasing require-ments for firms that hold concessions (the Mining Code currently requires firms to pay an annual fee but not to carry out actual exploratory activity; there are suggestions that these firms will need to make mandatory investments). Mining firms could also face more stringent regulations regarding the environmental impact of their operations and the effects on local communities. Our baseline forecast is that the overall operating climate will remain favourable and that the changes will not distort the business environment to the extent that companies will disinvest. However, a heavier regulatory burden will remain a risk for firms and may dissuade new entrants to the market, particularly towards the end of the forecast period.
- Competition law is robust and is backed by an independent agency with broad powers to investigate and prosecute violations. A separate tribunal investigates claims of monopolistic practices, including collusion and abuse of a dominant market position. We do not expect a shift in overall government policy in this area during 2021-25.
- The platform "empresa en un día" (company in a day) was launched in 2013 by Sebastián Piñera during his first presidential term (2010-14) to spur entrepreneurship. Since then more than 689,000 companies have been created in Chile. Despite the pandemic, a record 158,586 new businesses were created in 2020-a 14.4% increase from 2019. The total number of firms registered in the country now exceeds 1m, of which almost all are either small or medium-sized, and 1% are large. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) generate about 65% of all jobs.

Business environment outlook: Policy towards foreign investment                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
9.6 9.6 3 3 1 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
The FDI outlook is positive despite uncertainty about new constitution Chile's score for policy towards foreign investment remains unchanged, and this remains the strongest area of its business environment; it ranks third globally and is the highest-ranked country in Latin America by some margin in 2021-25. Foreign investors have ample scope to develop new ventures and acquire existing ones, which has meant that the country has attracted substantial flows of FDI of the years, sometimes exceeding 10% of GDP. The foreign-investment regime is based on non-discrimination between local and foreign investors, as mandated by the constitution. Although we expect constitutional reforms to tighten restrictions on private-sector firms in some areas, with the state taking on a more prominent role (affecting the country's score for policy towards private enterprise and competition), reforms are highly unlikely to discriminate specifically against foreign investors. This explains why Chile's score and rankings in this area remain high, even if inflows are likely to be more muted in 2021-25 as a result of the reform The country's natural resources and track record of relative economic and political stability (despite uncertainty about the upcoming constitutional reform), along with its openness to foreign investment, means that FDI is likely to provide some support.

- In September 2020 the Comisión Chilena del Cobre (Cochilco, the copper authority) stated that it expects mining investment to total just over US$74bn in 2020-29, with nearly 90% of these projects focused on copper mining. Cochilco hopes that soaring global copper prices will help Chile to meet its longer-term investment targets as copper mining firms seek to lift output. We agree with this interpretation to an extent: global demand for copper will be boosted by a recovering construction sector in Asia, as well as rising demand for renewable energy (copper is used for a wide range of renewable energy provision and in electric vehicles). The fact that Chile is the world's largest copper producer means that it is likely to benefit from significant investment. However, with the constitutional reform process likely to increase taxes and royalties in the sector, not all of Cochilco's envisaged US$74bn investment is likely to materialise.
- The Corporación de Fomento de la Producción (Corfo, the development-promotion agency) and InvestChile (a new investment-promotion office) will continue to manage various industry-specific incentive programmes. These particularly aim to promote investments in energy, forestry, marine activities, mining and tourism. A separate government fund also targets the development of infrastructure. Corfo provides affordable financing, subsidies and tax credits for research and development (R&D), among other incentives. InvestChile will continue to offer personalised advisory services to navigate the government's many investment-promotion programmes. We expect this broad structure to remain in place in 2021-25.

Business environment outlook: Foreign trade and exchange controls                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.7 8.7 28 22 2 2
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Chile has more FTAs than any other country Chile's trade and foreign-exchange regime will remain broadly open during the forecast period, with its underlying score remaining unchanged and its global rank improving by six places in 2021-25. We expect average export and import volumes to increase as a share of GDP during the forecast period. Although there is some uncertainty about the content of likely constitutional reforms, we do not expect the authorities to shift policy by raising tariffs or veering away from a long-running commitment to free trade. Nor do we expect any exchange restrictions to be introduced that would affect capital or investment flows. The main risk to these projections is if Mr Boric unexpectedly wins the November presidential election, as his foreign policy agenda envisages local and regional governments taking part in signing new trade agreements, as well as evaluating (and potentially modifying) existing ones. This could limit the scope for further gains in free trade.

- Chile has one of the simplest and most transparent trade regimes in the world. The country opted for unilateral trade liberalisation in the 1970s and has actively pursued FTAs to promote export-led growth. Chile has a single import-tariff rate, with few exceptions, and has signed trade agreements with a broad network of international partners. As at August these totalled 30 agreements and involved 65 countries, which account for 88% of global GDP and 65% of the global population. About 95% of Chile's trade is conducted on a preferential basis. The most important are FTAs signed with the EU (2003), the US (2004), China (2006) and Japan (2007). Chile also has FTAs with South Korea, Malaysia, Turkey, the European Free-Trade Association, Canada, Central America, Australia, Vietnam, Hong Kong and Mexico. Chile is a member of the Pacific Alliance free-trade bloc-together with Mexico, Colombia and Peru-and has more limited agreements with India, New Zealand, Singapore and Brunei.
- The Piñera government signed an FTA with Brazil in 2018, just before the former Brazilian president, Michel Temer (2016-18), left office. The Chilean legislature ratified the agreement in July 2020, but Brazil is yet to do so. Ratification is unlikely in the short term in the context of the coronavirus pandemic; at best it might be approved and come into force towards the end of the 2021-25 forecast period.
- After the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) fell apart following the decision of the former US president, Donald Trump (2017-21), to remove the US from the deal, Chile and the ten remaining countries signed the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) in March 2018. Mr Piñera submitted it to Congress in November and it was approved in the Chamber of Deputies (the lower house) after a lengthy debate in April 2019. However, ratification by the Senate (the upper house) was held up in late 2019 by mass protests and in early 2020 by the coronavirus outbreak. However, we expect it to be ratified within the forecast period.

Business environment outlook: Taxes                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
7.4 7.4 18 23 1 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Constitutional reforms likely to include some tax increases Chile's score for tax policy remains stable in the forecast period and although it retains its first place regionally, Chile drops by five places globally. Total taxes paid remain relatively low by international comparison, but filing procedures are onerous and it takes much longer to prepare, file and pay corporate income tax, sales tax and labour taxes than in most other OECD high-income countries. Some taxes are likely to rise in the forecast period; a mining royalties bill has already been proposed by the opposition, partly to increase funds for social spending, and is awaiting a Senate vote. This bill and other revenue-raising measures are likely to be a focus of the constitutional reform discussions. Our baseline forecast is that changes will be fairly moderate, with legislative reforms striking a balance between ensuring a firmer flow of revenue to the state and maintaining a competitive tax policy. However, there is a risk that constitutional reform proposals might seek more aggressive tax increases, with companies bearing the brunt of efforts to lift revenue (in which case Chile's score and ranking would slip). Additional risk stems from an unexpected Boric presidency, as he would seek to impose a more progressive wealth and property tax structure, eliminate tax exemptions on capital gains and introduce mining royalties.

- There have been several reforms to the tax system in recent years. In 2018 the Piñera administration introduced a proposal to simplify the corporate tax code and create a unified system that integrated the corporate and personal tax regimes. However, because of nationwide protests that began in 2019, the bill underwent extensive changes in the Senate, where the idea of a unified system was rejected. The revised proposal, which was approved in February 2020, simplifies and reduces taxes for small businesses and introduces a variety of new levies including a new income tax bracket for the wealthiest individuals, a 40% tax rate for those earning more than Ps15m per month and a surcharge on the property tax for those with properties valued above Ps400m.
- Employers are likely to face higher mandatory pension contributions in the 2021-25 forecast period. Public frustrations about meagre pension benefits (which often come in at below the monthly minimum wage of US$400) was one of the factors behind the bout of social unrest that erupted in October 2019. The government had already tabled a pension reform bill, but as a result of the unrest the authorities amended the bill, increasing the mandatory contributions paid by employers by 6 percentage points and beefing up a solidarity component of transfers to the poorest pensioners. The reform was delayed owing to the coronavirus pandemic but is likely to be passed in 2021-25. Recent legislation allowing individuals to draw down funds from their pensions may also have implications for employers. Three bills have been passed over the last 12 months, each one allowing individuals to draw down up to 10% of their funds held in the pensions system. The government estimates that the measures will leave 4.2m members of the private pension fund system (about a third) without any funds in their personal accounts, raising risks to the system in the long-term. The most recent withdrawal bill, passed in April, allows withdrawn funds to be repaid gradually through state and employer contributions. Given that the withdrawals weaken the underlying pensions system, it is possible that additional measures will be required over the longer term to bolster contributions. It is likely that the state will fund some of this, but private companies are also likely to face higher contributions.

Business environment outlook: Financing                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
8.1 8.5 8 8 1 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Corporate access to finance will improve from 2021 Chile remains the leader in Latin America in terms of securing corporate finance, and its underlying score improves slightly in 2021-25 (although its global and regional rankings remain unchanged). Although the coronavirus pandemic affected corporate access to finance in Chile, the fact that the banking sector was in solid shape before the crisis meant that the impact on companies operating in Chile was less severe than elsewhere in the region. Some monetary policy tightening is likely in 2021-25, but the policy stance will remain fairly loose (rates will remain low in real terms), which will feed through to commercial lending rates. Corporate bond issuance dropped sharply as a result of the pandemic, but Chile still boasts a sophisticated capital market with high levels of stockmarket capitalisation, and corporate issuance is likely to recover rapidly from 2021. If policy swings much more to the left as a result of the 2021 elections and the constitutional reform process (which is not our baseline scenario, but still a significant risk), the cost of credit may rise more sharply than we currently expect.

- Despite significant uncertainty about policy direction, we expect the banking system to remain resilient. Stress tests conducted by the BCCh have shown that the banking system has enough capital and reserves buffer to deal with even a severely adverse scenario. Assuming that our baseline forecast materialises-with a centrist administration and a public referendum on constitutional reform guarding against radical changes-we expect firms to benefit from easier access to long-term finance through credits and leasing. Some will also take advantage of other financing options, such as stock and bond issues, as well as what has until now been a competitive and flexible syndicated loan market for maturities of up to ten years. In July Europe's largest securities clearing house, Euroclear, decided to include Chilean corporate bonds on its investor platform; this will also improve financing conditions for Chilean companies, as large investors (such as pension funds and sovereign wealth funds) trade through these platforms.

Rollback of liquidity measures will tighten conditions for smaller firms
- In contrast to larger firms, many small companies will continue to struggle to obtain bank credit. According to OECD data, only about 19% of commercial lending goes to SMEs, a figure that has been broadly unchanged in the past decade and is one of the lowest levels in the OECD and well below other large economies in the region. Small companies have often had to rely on 30-day credit lines, which have been (and will continue to be) more difficult to secure when investor sentiment weakens. Part of the government's coronavirus support package was aimed at improving the availability of credit for SMEs, and the Comisión para el Mercado Financiero (CMF, the financial market commission) permitted the use of mortgage guarantees to safeguard SME loans. This helped to ease immediate pandemic-related problems facing SMEs but provided little help with longer-term difficulties in securing credit. Now that the Covid-19 response measures are being rolled back, financing conditions for these companies will tighten, making obtaining credit more difficult during 2021-25.

Business environment outlook: The labour market                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.5 6.4 28 41 2 3
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Greater labour protections and minimum wages are likely in 2021-25 The labour market has traditionally been one of the weaker areas of Chile's business environment, and this remains the case in 2021-25. Despite only marginal slippage in the underlying score, its regional and global rankings fall (the latter by 13 places), reflecting progress in other similarly ranked countries. The unemployment rate was around 7% for much of the historical period but spiked to above 13% as a result of the coronavirus pandemic; it has since fallen but remains well above the historical average. Many of the jobs lost have been in low-skilled areas, meaning that skills shortages will remain a problem in some sectors. Businesses will continue to complain that the labour regime is too rigid and that it offers overly strong worker protections through restrictive regulations and high firing costs (one month's wage per year worked at the company). However, following social unrest in late 2019, moves to pass legislation to scale back this protection are unlikely. On the contrary, measures including a rise in the minimum wage and even a possible reduction in the number of working hours could form part of a greater social agenda designed to placate restive public opinion.

- There have been no major education reforms since the second government of Michelle Bachelet (2006-10; 2014-18), when Congress passed a range of legislation to expand access to pre-school, university and vocational education. A higher education reform law guaranteed free education, which has existed since 2016 but is subject to inclusion in each year's national budget. Only about 60% of students study for free; the reform will extend this, but only gradually. However, the reform measures have failed to tackle the divide between public and private secondary schools; the majority of students who attend private schools pass university entrance tests, whereas only 30% from public schools do so. This has fuelled the perception that the education system widens social inequalities. We expect the constitutional reform process to include some measures related to education provision.
- A labour reform approved in 2017 strengthened unions, as it expanded the categories of workers who can join a union, set a floor for negotiations (not permitting the weakening of workers' benefits) and prohibited the replacement of striking workers. It also prohibited the extension of benefits to non-union members. So far, the impact of the reform has been muted (only 9% of workers belong to a union, although that level is higher in the mining sector).

Business environment outlook: Infrastructure                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.3 7.3 35 29 1 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Chile retains first place in the regional ranking for infrastructure in 2021-25 and climbs six places, to 29th, in the global ranking. Chile's telecommunications and technological infrastructure is modern (particularly by regional standards), as the telecoms regulatory system encourages competition and the early adoption of new technologies. The transport infrastructure is resilient and mostly withstands regular seismic events and other natural disasters. The country has been hit by a series of natural disasters since 2010, including: an earthquake and a tsunami in 2010 in the centre-south region; earthquakes, tsunamis and floods in the north in 2014-15; the Calbuco volcano eruption of 2015; and wildfires in the centre-south in 2017. Although a weakening of the public finances as a result of the coronavirus pandemic will complicate ambitious plans for accelerated investment in a long-term infrastructure plan early in the forecast period, we expect greater progress in 2023-25.

- Once the impact of the pandemic eases, significant funding will be channelled into transport infrastructure. A new underground railway line in the capital, Santiago, opened in November 2017. The government is planning to complete three new lines (numbered 7, 8 and 9) and extend four existing lines, but the timetable has already slipped and the new lines are not expected to begin operation until 2026. Additional transport funding aimed at alleviating congestion will be allocated to Gran Valparaíso and Gran Concepción, the two largest metropolitan areas outside the capital. Chiloé Island is also set to be finally connected to the mainland via a 2.8-km bridge, but there have been repeated delays to construction (the current completion target is 2025, but this may slip further).

New infrastructure plan aims to accelerate progress
- Chile's robust infrastructure is largely attributable to a successful con-cession system that was launched in the 1990s. Since the late 2000s, however, the number of new infrastructure investment projects has waned as many projects were completed. The government is trying to reverse this trend; in June 2020, it unveiled an ambitious US$50bn infrastructure programme to cover the period 2020-50. The plan is front-loaded, with 45% of planned investment targeted for 2020-29. It focuses on the country's transport network, with more than 60% of the plan dedicated to improving the road network. The plan also anticipates significant investment in the railway, airport and port provision. Most projects will be developed through public-private partnerships (PPPs).
- A US$9bn PPP infrastructure fund, the Fondo de Infraestructura, was launched in 2018. The fund changed its name to Desarrollo País in January 2020. The fund's first financing project involved a US$521m investment to construct a highway between the cities of Talca and Chillán. The project is at the concessioning stage, and construction is expected to begin by 2022-23. In 2020 the fund announced that it would focus on public buildings, public housing and digital infrastructure. In August 2020 the fund obtained a concession to lay subsea fibre-optic cables connecting Chile with Auckland (New Zealand) and Sydney (Australia); construction is scheduled to begin in 2022.
- Although energy infrastructure had been seen as the weakest part of Chile's infrastructure matrix, this changed during Ms Bachelet's second term, with the implementation of a long-term strategy (Energía 2050) that extends beyond our 2021-25 forecast period. Other improvements include a decrease in the price of renewable energy (which helped to spur an increase in clean energy sources) and the connection between the north and central energy grids in 2017. These efforts have helped to contain energy prices, which for years were a major hindrance to investment.

Business environment outlook: Technological readiness                
Value of index a   Global rank b   Regional rank c  
2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25 2016-20 2021-25
6.1 7.2 43 36 1 1
a Out of 10. b Out of 82 countries. c  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Chile's ranking for technological readiness is the highest in the region and the country improves by seven places, to 36th, in the global ranking. Its score is supported by strong internet usage and efforts by successive governments to improve technological and innovative capacity. Chile is one of Latin America's most advanced telecoms and IT markets, and is supported by a regulatory system that seeks to promote competition and IT sector develop-ment. Mobile and internet penetration levels are high, and smartphone owner-ship is the highest in the region. However, investment in R&D is low. According to the latest OECD data, R&D investment in Chile was equivalent to less than 0.4% of GDP in 2018, compared with an OECD average of more than 2.4%.

- E-commerce has grown rapidly in recent years, from US$1bn in 2012 to US$9.4bn in 2020-just under 4% of GDP. This makes Chile's digital economy among the largest in the region, but still below levels of 7-8% of GDP in the US, Japan and Europe. The Santiago Chamber of Commerce (CCS) is forecasting e-commerce sales growth of 25% in 2021, to nearly US$12bn, before medium-term annual growth of about 30%.
- Chile was the first country in Latin America to award 5G licences. The Subsecretaríá de Telecomunicaciones (Subtel, the telecoms regulator) oversaw a consultation in August-September 2020, before launching an auction process in February for spectrum in the 700-MHz, AWS (1.8-2.2 GHz), 3.5-GHz and 26-GHz bands. WOM (owned by UK investment firm Novator Partners), Movistar (Spain) and Entel (Chile) were awarded spectrum. The government is aiming to launch 5G services within two years.

The science ministry will lead national science and technology policy
- The Ministry of Science, Knowledge, Technology and Innovation was created in December 2018 and oversees all policies, programmes and plans designed to strengthen innovation in science and technology. The ministry has a technical advisory committee that periodically reviews its policies, and an inter-ministerial committee-comprising the ministers of science, finance, economy and education-tasked with developing a national science policy.

Economic forecast: Policy trends Policy uncertainty will be high in the next two years as the process to rewrite the constitution unfolds. Assuming that the constitutional reform is approved in the exit referendum in late 2022, the implementation of the reforms will dictate the course of policy in 2023-25. However, in the immediate term, the most important policy challenges facing the government are to sustain economic recovery through continued fiscal stimulus and to vaccinate the population against Covid-19. Chile's vaccination rollout is progressing quickly and it will reach herd immunity by end-2021-before other major Latin American countries. The identification of the Delta variant has led the government to seek to administer a third vaccine dose that is expected to begin in September.
As the constitutional reform process unfolds and the presidential campaign ramps up, we expect left-wing lawmakers to initiate populist proposals that are more likely to be approved in the current legislative environment. A recent instance of this was the passage of a law allowing a third withdrawal from individual pension funds. The withdrawal received broad popular and legislative support, even from legislators from the centre-right CV in spite of opposition from the executive branch. We expect the CV to be receptive to populist proposals for the rest of the current legislative term in a bid to gain public approval ahead of the November polls.
As for the constitutional reform process itself, detailed policy proposals will only begin to emerge slowly as negotiations are likely to be prolonged and divisive. We believe that constituent assembly will agree to popular measures, such as increasing the state's involvement in the provision of social services such as healthcare, pensions and education (partly financed through tax increases). However, owing to the dominance of the left and the CV lacking the seats needed to block radical proposals, we anticipate that the resulting text will include contentious reforms that will affect the business environment. These are likely to include an increase in the contribution of private mining to state revenue, changes to the mining regulatory environment (such as stricter conditions for obtaining mining concessions), and greater state control of natural resources (especially water). A check on the most radical proposals, including possible wholesale nationalisation of certain sectors, will be the exit referendum in 2022 as extreme reforms would be likely to result in the new constitution failing to pass. Nonetheless, we expect the new constitution to have the potential to harm business operations by raising operating costs and restricting new entrants.
We expect that Chile's strong institutions-including the Banco Central de Chile (BCCh, the central bank)-will not be significantly affected by the constitutional reform process. This will help to ensure that fiscal and monetary policy prudence is maintained. Assuming that the new constitution is approved in 2022, the implementation of these new constitutional rights will be a major challenge for the next government. However, despite the increased expenditure (funded through tax increases), we currently assume that pension reforms-and in fact, all reforms that come out of the constitutional reform process-will be fiscally prudent.
Economic forecast: Fiscal policy Fiscal indicators
(% of GDP)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Central government expenditure 27.2 29.2 27.9 27.4 26.6 26.2
Central government revenue 19.9 22.1 22.0 22.4 23.1 23.6
Central government balance -7.3 -7.1 -5.9 -5.0 -3.5 -2.6
Chile's careful fiscal management has kept the country's public debt (forecast at 36.8% of GDP in 2021) low by regional standards and provides the government with the scope for further pandemic-related fiscal support in 2021, but fiscal consolidation will need to take priority for the next government. The deficit will stay wide in 2021-22, averaging 6.5% of GDP, amid ongoing fiscal stimulus and the need to address demands for increased spending on public services. Once the health crisis subsides and the economy returns to pre-pandemic levels, we expect fiscal consolidation to gain steam and the deficit to narrow to 2.6% of GDP in 2025. We expect the new constitution to increase the state's role in the provision of social services, which will keep the spending/GDP ratio above pre-pandemic levels in the forecast period. As such, the bulk of consolidation throughout the forecast period will be driven by revenue growth, which will be bolstered by higher copper prices and economic recovery in the near term, and by tax increases in the medium term. Despite this, the deficit will fail to return to pre-pandemic levels by 2025, with successive fiscal deficits raising the public debt/GDP ratio to a peak of 43.3% by 2024, dropping slightly thereafter.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Monetary policy Interest rates
(%)
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
30-89-day lending rate (av) 3.8 4.4 4.8 5.5 5.5 5.5
Long-term interest rate (av) 2.8 3.4 3.6 4.0 4.4 4.8
Owing to a rapid economic recovery, incipient inflationary pressures and to lend support to the peso (which has been hit by sell-offs amid recent political uncertainty), the BCCh raised its benchmark interest rates by 25 basis points to 0.75%. We expect the BCCh to continue to raise rates for the rest of the year, reaching 1.25% by end-2021. We assume that the tightening cycle will continue for the rest of our 2021-25 forecast period, but we do not expect this to hamper econ-omic recovery, as the policy rate is likely to remain below its neutral level at least for the next two years. We expect it to return to positive territory only in 2025.
The constitutional reform process poses moderate risks to monetary policy. Although we do not expect the constitutional reform to eliminate the BCCh's autonomy, there is a risk that the bank's mandate will expand to include indicators such as employment, which would alter policymaking in practice.
Economic forecast: International assumptions   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Economic growth (%)
US GDP -3.5 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.0
OECD GDP -4.8 4.9 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.0
World GDP -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
World trade -8.1 8.0 5.6 4.7 4.2 4.3
Inflation indicators (% unless otherwise indicated)
US CPI 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
OECD CPI 1.2 2.8 2.2 2.0 2.0 2.1
Manufactures (measured in US$) 0.2 6.5 1.4 1.9 2.7 2.5
Oil (Brent; US$/b) 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
Non-oil commodities (measured in US$) 2.9 30.9 -2.3 0.1 -8.1 -0.1
Copper (US cents/lb) 279.8 412.2 432.0 461.2 379.0 386.0
Financial variables
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate (av; %) 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6
Ps:US$ (av) 792.17 726.64 739.96 736.00 721.89 715.62
Economic forecast: Economic growth % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GDP -6.0 7.5 2.7 2.5 2.4 2.4
Private consumption -7.6 9.2 3.6 2.9 2.5 2.3
Government consumption -3.7 4.3 3.9 3.4 3.1 2.7
Gross fixed investment -11.7 8.5 4.0 4.0 3.8 3.5
Exports of goods & services -1.1 4.8 3.5 3.4 3.7 4.0
Imports of goods & services -12.8 15.0 5.9 5.0 5.1 4.7
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -2.0 1.6 -0.3 -0.2 0.0 0.0
Total domestic demand -9.8 10.1 3.4 3.0 2.9 2.6
Agriculture -2.6 3.5 3.7 4.0 4.2 4.2
Industry -3.7 5.0 4.1 4.4 4.7 4.7
Services -5.5 9.0 1.9 1.5 1.1 1.0
Chile will be among the first countries in the region to recover from the coronavirus crisis, with real GDP expected to grow by 7.5% in 2021. The robust economic recovery is being driven by a number of factors: robust export growth; large-scale fiscal and monetary policy support; pension withdrawals; and the rapid pace of the national vaccine rollout. Nonetheless, we assume that the constitutional reform process and the presidential election will constrain the trajectory of real GDP growth after 2021. In our view, the effects of policy uncertainty stemming from these events will be felt strongly in 2022, with a particular impact on fixed investment; for this reason, we now expect GDP growth to slow to just 2.7% next year. Although we currently assume that macroeconomic policy will remain prudent, the new constitution (which we expect to be ratified in the second half of 2022) is likely to include some populist reforms that will weigh on the business environment and investment. Real GDP growth will therefore average a modest 2.4% in 2023-25.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Sectoral trends Mining will remain among the largest economic sectors and contributors to growth over the 2021-25 forecast period. With about 200m tonnes in proven high-grade copper reserves (24% of the world's total in 2019), which are advantageously situated close to the sea, Chile has been the favourite global destination for copper mining investment over the past two decades. This has made it by far the world's largest copper producer, with output of 5.7m tonnes in 2020, equal to 28.5% of the global total. Output has weakened in recent years, mainly reflecting the decline of copper prices and ore grades. Output fell in 2016 and 2017, owing to a 43-day strike at Escondida, the country's largest mine, as well as flooding in several northern mines. Growth returned in 2018, as prices and investment recovered, but the pick-up was cut short owing to strikes at major copper mines amid the October 2019.protest movement.
However, the sector recovered in 2020 despite economic weakness caused by the pandemic. Mining sector GDP grew by 1.3% in 2020, with copper output growing by 0.3%. In 2021 so far the sector has benefited from growing external demand (especially from China-Chile's main trading partner), which has fuelled prices of copper and other minerals. This trend will continue until 2023; we forecast that copper prices will exceed US$4/lb per year on average until then-above the 2006-13 commodity boom years. Prices are set to peak at about US$4.6/lb in 2023 before falling slightly as external demand normalises, but will remain above the commodity boom levels over the forecast period. On the downside, public policy towards the mining sector will be the subject of intense debate in the constitutional reform process. We expect the new constitution to contain reforms that seek to raise the tax burden on private miners (based on the global price of copper and other minerals), increase state control in the sector and toughen regulations for awarding mining concessions to private companies. These reforms could raise operating costs for miners, deter new entrants and even hamper investment in the sector. Nevertheless, the country will remain a competitive mining investment destination because of its favourable geological conditions, relative economic stability, and unparalleled abundance of the mineral.
The market is divided between Codelco (the state copper firm) and private mining companies, with private firms accounting for two-thirds of output. Codelco was nationalised in 1971 and is the largest copper-producing and exporting company in the world. By law, the company is required to hand over all of its profits to the state. Major multinational mining companies with a presence in Chile include BHP (Australia), Rio Tinto (UK-Australia), Glencore (UK-Switzerland), Anglo-American (UK), Freeport-McMoRan (US) and Grupo México (Mexico). There are also many local private firms, such as Antofagasta.
Codelco has continued to operate at near normal levels during the coronavirus pandemic. In line with the sector's recovery in 2020, copper production at Codelco grew by 1.2% in 2020. This trend has continued in 2021, with production rising by 6.9% year on year in the first quarter; combined with rallying copper prices, this bolstered copper revenue, which increased by a whopping 108% year on year in January-March. The Chamber of Deputies (the lower house) rejected a proposal to privatise the company to generate funds for the country's coronavirus response, and we do not expect it to be privatised in the forecast period, bearing in mind the growing demand from left-of-centre politicians and local communities to increase state presence in the sector.
Codelco plans to invest US$40bn by 2028 as it seeks to maintain mine production (by extending the life of ageing mines and exploring for new ores inside and outside Chile) and meet tighter environmental standards at its smelting facilities. Its investment plan comprises five major projects: trans-formation from open-pit mining to large-scale underground mining at Chuquicamata (launched in August 2019); construction of a new mine level at the company's underground El Teniente mine (with start up due in 2023); the expansion of processing capacity at its Rajo Inca and Andina mines (due in 2021 and 2025 respectively); and an expansion at the Radomiro Tomic mine (due for completion in 2021). The pipeline of investment projects will support medium-term output growth at Codelco.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Inflation % 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Consumer prices 3.0 3.6 3.0 2.7 2.8 2.8
Average wages 3.7 5.2 4.8 5.0 5.3 5.3
Real wages 0.6 0.8 1.7 2.2 2.5 2.4
Unit labour costs -4.6 9.7 2.7 5.1 6.8 5.7
Labour costs per hour (US$) 4.3 5.0 5.1 5.4 5.8 6.1
We expect average inflation to reach 3.6% in 2021 amid a recovery in domestic demand, a dovish monetary stance during the first half of the year, high commodity prices (especially oil), as well as pass-through from exchange-rate depreciation. A stabilisation of domestic demand and the beginning of a monetary-tightening cycle in the third quarter will bring the annual inflation rate closer to the middle of the BCCh's 2-4% target range: we expect it to average 2.8% in 2022-25. Strong confidence in the inflation-targeting framework and in monetary policymaking will help to control inflation in the event of short-term currency shocks stemming from commodity price fluctuations and electoral uncertainty.
Economic forecast: Exchange rates   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Exchange rate Ps:US$ (av) 792.17 726.64 739.96 736.00 721.89 715.62
Exchange rate Ps:US$ (end-period) 711.24 761.97 757.47 724.59 719.56 712.76
Exchange rate Ps:¥100 (av) 741.97 668.59 669.21 656.56 638.56 639.80
Real effective exchange rate index (2010=100; av) 84.9 88.5 88.4 89.7 91.4 91.8
Purchasing power parity Ps:US$ (av) 427.4 422.7 424.1 427.9 433.6 442.9
After appreciating in late 2020 and the first half of 2021, we expect the peso to depreciate for the rest of 2021, owing to political and policy uncertainty stemming from what is likely to be a divisive constitutional reform process and a closely contested presidential election. We forecast that the peso will reach Ps761.97:US$1 at end-2021, from Ps711.24:US$1 at end-2020. High copper prices and rising interest rates will help to attenuate the depreciation and we anticipate that the central bank will intervene in the event of extreme volatility. However, there are clear and significant risks to this forecast stemming from the presidential election and constitutional reform process being more polarised and radical than we currently anticipate.
With this politics-related caveat, we currently assume that the currency will appreciate over the medium term, strengthened by four main factors: Chile reaching herd immunity by end-2021, boosting growth; a more stable political environment and greater policy clarity following the expected ratification of the new constitution (in 2022); an improving interest-rate differential with the US (we expect US monetary policy to remain stable until 2023); and strong export growth on the back of higher copper prices and increased demand owing to the growth of green energy investments (especially from China). We expect the peso to reach Ps712.76:US$1 by end-2025. The real effective exchange rate (in trade-weighted terms) will appreciate over the forecast period, but it will be slightly weaker than its long run (20-year) average, suggesting that there will not be a major hit to export competitiveness.
Economic forecast: External sector US$ bn 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Current-account balance 3.4 -1.0 -2.6 -3.6 -7.8 -9.3
Current-account balance (% of GDP) 1.3 -0.4 -0.8 -1.1 -2.2 -2.5
Goods: exports fob 73.5 93.5 102.4 111.0 117.7 127.8
Goods: imports fob -55.1 -76.6 -85.8 -94.1 -103.1 -112.8
Trade balance 18.4 16.9 16.6 16.8 14.6 15.0
Services: credit 6.3 7.4 8.4 9.3 10.2 11.0
Services: debit -11.3 -13.3 -15.1 -16.3 -17.8 -18.6
Services balance -5.0 -5.9 -6.6 -7.0 -7.6 -7.7
Primary income: credit 7.4 6.5 7.1 7.5 8.0 8.8
Primary income: debit -17.7 -19.4 -20.3 -22.0 -24.3 -27.2
Primary income balance -10.3 -12.9 -13.3 -14.6 -16.3 -18.3
Secondary income: credit 4.5 4.4 4.9 5.2 6.3 6.8
Secondary income: debit -3.6 -3.6 -4.2 -4.1 -4.8 -5.1
Secondary income balance 1.0 0.8 0.7 1.1 1.6 1.7
A robust recovery in private consumption and investment will lift imports, pushing the current account into slight deficit of 0.4% of GDP in 2021, after recording a surplus of 1.3% of GDP in 2020. The deficit will widen further in the medium term as the trade surplus continues to narrow and the primary income deficit widens (owing to external debt-service obligations and a pick-up in profit repatriation abroad). Despite this, the current-account deficit will average a manageable 1.7% of GDP in 2022-25.
Improved sentiment towards emerging markets will support a modest recovery in inward foreign direct investment (FDI) in 2021, to 3.5% of GDP, from 3.4% of GDP in 2020. We assume that the constitutional reform will weigh on investor confidence (both domestic and foreign); inward FDI will fall in 2022, rising only modestly thereafter but remaining far below its historical average.


Enlarge this image.
Economic forecast: Foreign direct investment in Chile Stocks and flows Despite its small size, Chile has historically been an important destination for foreign direct investment (FDI), particularly in its mining, energy and transport infrastructure sectors. FDI flows can fluctuate widely from year to year, often reflecting the fortunes of the copper mining industry. FDI fell dramatically between 2014 and 2017 (from US$23.6bn to US$6.1bn) but recovered thereafter, albeit temporarily. Inflows fell again in 2020 (to US$8.5bn), as investment appetite deteriorated globally amid the coronavirus pandemic. Despite this, Chile still has the most favourable climate for foreign businesses in the region, with an FDI stock/GDP ratio of 88.6% in 2020, compared with much smaller ratios for Brazil (52.4%) and Mexico (58.9%). Chile's importance as an investor in other regional markets has also increased in recent years, with a focus on the airline, shipping and retail sectors. Outward flows declined considerably from 2015 until 2018 (falling to US$1.3bn), but flows recovered in 2019-20, averaging US$105bn.
Origin and distribution According to the latest data from the Banco Central de Chile (the central bank), Chile's largest source of accumulated FDI stock in 2019 was the US, which accounted for 13% of the total stock, closely followed by Spain (12.7%) and Canada (12.6%). The Netherlands and Italy accounted for another 11.6% combined. FDI broadly supports major investments in the mining, energy, agrarian (especially wine), wholesale and retail, telecommunications, financial services, and construction and infrastructure sectors. Infrastructure investment is driven by foreign firms finding opportunities under the government's public-private partnership concessions. However, much of the FDI flowing into Chile is channelled through tax havens such as the Bahamas, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Luxembourg and Panama (which between them contributed a further 11.4% of the FDI stock in 2019), making it difficult to ascertain the true origin of FDI. In terms of the sectoral distribution of FDI stock, mining accounted for 31.6% in 2019, followed by financial services (23.5%) and utilities (electricity, gas and water, at 13.3%). Other important sectors that have attracted significant foreign investment in recent years include commerce, manufacturing, transport and communications.
Determinants Chile's foreign investment regime, which has been in place for three decades, is one of the most liberal in the world. There is a well-respected principle of non-discrimination between local and foreign investors, who enjoy additional protection from the rapidly expanding network of investment-protection accords and double-taxation treaties signed with other countries. Generally sound regulation, combined with political and economic stability, and firm growth, have supported FDI inflows since the early 1990s. Moreover, Chile's managerial talent and well-qualified labour force (by regional standards), together with a strong rule of law, low crime rates and a large network of free-trade agreements (FTAs), have encouraged a growing number of multinationals to use Chile's capital, Santiago, as their Latin America headquarters. Moreover, Chile's entry to the OECD in 2010 made it subject to various investment-related provisions and guidelines relating to liberalisation of capital movements and trade in services (including business and financial services, insurance, culture, tourism, and travel).
Impact FDI began to fund a growing share of gross fixed investment in Chile in the 1990s. In 2001-06 FDI funded 25.9% of gross fixed investment, contributing to the modernisation of infrastructure, including telecoms. The ratio rose to an annual average of 38.4% in 2007-15, owing to large mining and energy investments, but it then slipped significantly, to just 12.2% in 2018. The ratio recovered slightly in 2019 before falling again in 2020 owing to the pandemic. Although the ratio is set to recover in 2021 amid improving investment appetite, it will deteriorate again over the rest of The Economist Intelligence Unit's 2021-25 forecast period. This is because the ongoing constitutional reform process is likely to result in some contentious reforms that regulate private-sector control over natural resources (including water, energy and mines) and that increase operating costs by increasing the tax burden on private companies in these sectors. Reforms of this kind will have the potential to deter investment, especially FDI, and we therefore expect the contribution of FDI to gross fixed investment to be modest in 2022-25, averaging 13.3%.
Outward FDI has also grown as Chilean businesses have expanded abroad, which has helped many local firms to establish themselves as important regional players. After falling to a lowly US$1.3bn in 2018, outward FDI jumped to US$10.5bn in 2019-20, taking the outward FDI stock to US$163.9bn in 2020, according to the IMF. The fact that Chilean firms were operating in a competitive domestic environment well before regional peers had liberalised their own economies has enabled businesses to position themselves successfully in neighbouring countries. This has been most evident in the retail sector, where firms such as Ripley, Paris and Falabella have expanded aggressively in other markets such as Peru, Argentina, Colombia and Brazil.
Potential Despite the impact of the constitutional reform process, FDI inflows should remain strong over the forecast period although they are likely to be lower than we expected at the time of the last report, prior to the May constituent assembly elections. This will be aided by transparent business operating conditions, a fundamentally sound economy, a huge network of FTAs, double-taxation and investment-protection accords (the most modern infrastructure in Latin America), and a growing pool of skilled labour. Despite this, we expect FDI inflows to average a modest 3% of GDP annually in 2021-25-well below the level of 9% of GDP recorded in the bonanza years of 2008-15, during the commodities supercycle. The major acquisitions that have been common in the banking, telecoms and utilities sectors over the past two decades are unlikely to be repeated at the same pace, given near-complete levels of economic openness and liberalisation. Nevertheless, the services sector (for example) will have ample opportunities in a market in which incomes are expected to continue to grow steadily. Renewable energy will also attract significant investment.
Demographic assumptions Demographic profile
  2015 2020 2025
Population (m)
Total 18.0 19.1 19.2
 Male 8.8 9.4 9.5
 Female 9.1 9.7 9.7
Age profile (% of total population)
 0-14 20.5 19.8 19.0
 15-64 69.3 68.4 66.9
 65+ 10.2 11.8 14.1
Young-age dependency ratio 0.30 0.29 0.28
Old-age dependency ratio 0.15 0.17 0.21
Working-age population (m) 12.5 13.1 12.9
Urbanisation (% of total) 87.4 87.7 88.1
Labour force (m) 8.6 9.5 9.7
       
Period averages   2016-20 2021-25
Population growth (%)   1.2 0.1
Working-age population growth (%)   1.0 -0.3
Labour force growth (%)   1.9 0.4
Crude birth rate (per 1,000)   13.2 12.0
Crude death rate (per 1,000)   6.0 6.4
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   6.4 5.9
Life expectancy at birth (years)
 Male   77.0 78.1
 Female   82.2 82.6
 Average   79.7 80.4
Sources: International Labour Organisation (ILO), labour force projections; Economist Intelligence Unit estimates and forecasts; national statistics.
Chile's annual population growth rate is forecast to decelerate gradually, from 0.9% in 2020 to zero by 2025. This will bring the total population to 20.2m in 2050, meaning that Chile remains one of the least populated of Latin America's seven largest economies and the only one of those with a population below 20m in 2025. Over the last couple of decades, Chile has undergone a demo-graphic transition characterised by a drop in the birth rate and an increase in life expectancy. According to the national statistics institute (INE), births fell by 3.2% between 2002 and 2019, and life expectancy rose from 76.9 years to 80.6 years. In 2002 young people (aged 0-14) accounted for 26.5% of the population, but by 2019 this ratio had fallen to 19.4%. Meanwhile, the share of elderly people (those aged over 65) in the population during this period rose by 4 percentage points, from 7.9% in 2002. According to INE projections, by 2035 the share of the elderly population will have risen by 7 percentage points (from 2019), and the share of young people will fall, reaching 16.1% in 2035. Although Chile has a maturing demographic profile, we expect the share of the working-age population to remain roughly stable in 2021-25, at 67.7% of the total.
Tighter immigration laws will limit overall population growth Chile has traditionally been an immigrant-receiving country, although not to the same extent as other South American nations such as Argentina or Brazil. Since the 1970s most migrants have come from neighbouring Peru and Bolivia, with migrants often working in low-skilled jobs. However, the pace of inward migration has accelerated since 2005, with the number of foreigners in the country increasing by 123% between 2005 and 2014, to about 416,000. In 2020 INE reported that there were about 1.5m foreigners living in the country-0.8% higher than in 2019 and 12.4% higher than in 2018. The majority of foreign nationals hail from Venezuela (30.7%), Peru (16.3%), Haiti (12.5%), Colombia (11.4%) and Bolivia (8.5%).
The surge in immigration is due partly to the arrival of large numbers of Venezuelans and Haitians-prompted by humanitarian crises in those countries-and partly to a rise in economic migrants from countries such as Colombia, Ecuador and the Dominican Republic, who are attracted by the higher wages and quality of life. The Economist Intelligence Unit expects net inward migration to continue, given Chile's relative prosperity, but it will proceed at a more moderate pace than in 2015-17, as the government has instituted new laws to control the inward flow of mirgants. In April the government enacted a new migration law (which took eight years to be approved) that seeks to curb illegal migration. Under the law, foreigners are required to obtain a Chilean visa in their country of origin, which will limit the impact of immigration on population growth. Outward migration from Chile peaked during the dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet (1973-90) but has slowed since then. The government estimates that 850,000 Chileans live abroad, largely in Argentina, the US, Brazil and Sweden.
Unemployment will fall from the pandemic peak over the forecast period The economy was close to full employment in 2013-15, with average unemploy-ment at a historic low of 5.8%. However, furloughs and layoffs during the coronavirus pandemic pushed the unemployment rate to an all-time high of 12.1% in the second quarter of 2020. The rate has been declining since September 2020 and reached 9.5% at end-June. We expect this decline to continue as the economy recovers. The informal employment rate at end-2019 was 28.4%, according to the INE-a low figure for Latin America, where rates are often over 50%, even in the larger economies. However, the informal sector represents a large pool of untapped labour; bringing informal workers into the formal market could boost long-term growth and tax revenue.
Market opportunities: Market outlook   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Population (m) 19.1 19.2 19.3 19.2 19.2 19.2
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 253.0 297.4 307.4 327.3 353.2 379.3
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 13,234 15,478 15,969 17,005 18,360 19,714
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 468.9 511.2 536.4 563.0 588.1 612.8
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 24,527 26,607 27,863 29,246 30,569 31,849
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 163.3 194.3 205.7 222.2 244.0 264.8
Household consumption (US$ bn) 149.2 175.5 184.7 198.7 217.4 235.3
Household consumption per head (US$) 7,800 9,130 9,600 10,320 11,300 12,230
Exports of goods & services (% change) -1.1 4.8 3.5 3.4 3.7 4.0
Imports of goods & services (% change) -12.8 15.0 5.9 5.0 5.1 4.7
After contracting in 2020, income per head in US dollar terms will grow Chile's market opportunities are constrained by its small population (19.1m in 2020), but its high income-along with a legacy of political stability and effective economic management-will mean that the country remains an attractive destination for investment in the region. In the past three decades it has generally outperformed all other economies in Latin America in terms of GDP growth, and The Economist Intelligence Unit expects it to have one of the region's fastest recoveries from the coronavirus pandemic (we expect output to return to pre-pandemic levels in 2021 itself). This is due to a robust fiscal response and multiple rounds of pension withdrawals-both of which have boosted consumption growth-and improving external demand for Chilean exports. GDP growth will normalise after 2021 and average 2.5% in 2022-25. Income per head at purchasing power parity took a serious hit in 2020, sliding to an estimated US$24,527 per person (from US$26,000 per person in 2019) as the unemployment rate-and by extension, income losses-rose owing to layoffs and furloughs during the Covid-19 crisis. However, the deterioration in the living standards should be temporary, as a complete recovery is likely in 2021. GDP growth will outstrip population growth throughout 2021-25, with income per head rising to US$31,849 by 2025. Despite declining over the past decade, inequality will remain pronounced, with income discrepancies between metropolitan and northern regions, and less affluent regions in the centre-north and centre-south.
Rising income levels will boost import demand for consumer goods Chile's productive potential is limited by its small manufacturing base, which is dominated by agro-industrial output. As a result, a large share of consumer goods-such as electronics, cars and clothing-are imported. In 2018 consumer goods accounted for a solid 30% of all imports, but its share dropped to 28.8% in 2019 and 27.6% in 2020, owing to demand-side weakness caused by the social outbreak and then by the pandemic. Consumer goods imports plummeted by18.8% in 2020, as the pandemic depressed domestic demand, but they staged a robust recovery in the first half of 2021, growing by 65.6% compared with the year-earlier period. In addition to a low base of comparison, the dramatic first-half recovery can be attributed to consumption growth, which has been supported by expansive fiscal measures, multiple pension withdrawals that boosted household liquidity and a speedy Covid-19 vaccination campaign. Private consumption accounts for about 60% of GDP, and private consumption per head in Chile is among the highest in Latin America, averaging US$9,000 in 2015-18. It took a hit in 2020 (falling to about US$7,800) owing to the direct impact of the pandemic on consumption and to the depreciation of the Chilean peso against the US dollar, but we expect it to pick up this year as the economy recovers and per-head income levels rise. As a result, household expenditure on imports will also increase. For their part, retail sales are also recovering from the pandemic, in the second quarter of 2021, retail sales grew by 11.5% quarter on quarter in real, seasonally adjusted terms in April-June. We currently project that growth in real retail sales will average 2.5% in 2022-25.
Market opportunities: Consumer expenditure Consumer expenditure
  2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
US$ m            
Food, beverages & tobacco 40,255 46,283 47,886 50,421 53,654 56,354
Housing & household fuels 22,614 26,582 27,998 30,112 32,972 35,741
Clothing & footwear 5,185 6,019 6,297 6,711 7,242 7,700
Household goods & services 9,998 11,520 12,074 12,897 13,976 14,948
Health 11,798 13,905 14,703 15,904 17,544 19,177
Transport & communications 24,844 29,613 31,474 34,338 38,258 42,235
Leisure & education 19,910 23,134 24,415 26,348 28,953 31,479
Other 5,309 7,569 8,400 9,555 11,076 12,701
Total 149,183 175,484 184,733 198,727 217,401 235,317
% of total            
Food, beverages & tobacco 27.0 26.4 25.9 25.4 24.7  
Housing & household fuels 15.2 15.1 15.2 15.2 15.2 15.2
Clothing & footwear 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.3 3.3
Household goods & services 6.7 6.6 6.5 6.5 6.4 6.4
Health 7.9 7.9 8.0 8.0 8.1 8.1
Transport & communications 16.7 16.9 17.0 17.3 17.6 17.9
Leisure & education 13.3 13.2 13.2 13.3 13.3 13.4
Other 3.6 4.3 4.5 4.8 5.1 5.4
Consumer markets in Chile are well developed and competitive, owing to a free-market-oriented economy that has encouraged participation by foreign firms, as well as import penetration for a wide range of consumer goods. This has helped to bring prices down and attract a large number of participants, despite the small size of the economy, in effect turning it into a showcase market for firms wishing to expand in the region. Some highly competitive sectors include telecommunications and retail. A deep and sophisticated financial sector, which has historically benefited from ample credit supply, relatively low interest rates and narrow loan-deposit spreads, supports consumer expenditure. Large foreign and local firms coexist in the banking and insurance sectors, with the insurance sector enhanced by high and rising statutory obligations. Although there is some risk that the new constitution will contain reforms that regulate foreign investment in strategic sectors (such as telecoms and electricity), our baseline assumption is that the constitutional reform process will not affect the regulatory framework of the broader consumer goods industry in such a way that impedes investment and the entry of new firms. This should preserve competitiveness in the sector.
Market opportunities: Social indicators and living standards Social indicators and living standards
  2020   2025  
  Chile Latin America (av) Chile Latin America (av)
Health
Healthcare spending (% of GDP) 9.3 8.2 9.1 8.0
Healthcare spending (US$ per head) 1,224 585 1,778 817
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 6.2 14.4 5.7 12.5
Physicians (per 1,000 population) 2.7 2.5 3.0 2.8
Food and beverages
Food, beverages & tobacco (% of household spending) 27.0 40.6 24.0 38.2
Meat consumption (kg per person) 84.1 75.5 92.6 81.7
Milk consumption (litres per person) 117.0 132.0 123.0 138.0
Coffee & tea consumption (kg per person) 1.9 3.4 2.0 3.5
Consumer goods in use (per 1,000 population)
Passenger cars 169 194 179 204
Telephone main lines 132 155 114 138
Mobile phone subscribers 1,280 994 1,390 1,130
Television sets 1,190 691 1,475 783
Personal computers 581 446 631 460
Households
No. of households (m) 5,209.0 130,560.0 5,308.0 134,970.0
No. of people per household (av) 3.7 3.7 3.6 3.7
Income and income distribution
Median household income (US$) 18,960 12,120 29,650 17,050
Average monthly wage (US$) 980 455 1,400 614
Gini index 44.4 a – – –
a Latest available year.
Sources: UN Statistical Office; World Bank; Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); Euromonitor; World Health Organisation (WHO); national statistical offices; International Telecommunication Union (ITU); Economist Intelligence Unit estimates and forecasts.
Long-term outlook: The long-term outlook   2021-30 2031-50 2021-50
Population and labour force (% change; annual av)
Total population 0.18 0.22 0.20
Working-age population -0.20 -0.19 -0.19
Working-age minus total population -0.38 -0.40 -0.39
Labour force 0.30 -0.12 0.02
Growth and productivity (% change; annual av)
Growth of real GDP per head 2.9 2.0 2.3
Growth of real GDP 3.0 2.2 2.5
Labour productivity growth 1.8 2.4 2.2
Growth of capital stock 3.1 2.7 2.8
Total factor productivity growth 1.2 1.4 1.3
Once the ongoing coronavirus pandemic subsides, Chile's long-term outlook will benefit from a return to prudent monetary and fiscal policies (which is unlikely to be altered by the constitutional reform process), coupled with a commitment to the rule of law. A wide network of bilateral free-trade agreements (FTAs) and a largely liberal foreign-investment regime will assist local firms in expanding abroad and will help Chile to attract foreign direct investment (FDI). However, The Economist Intelligence Unit does not rule out the possibility that the government or new constitution could impose some regulations on foreign investment in certain strategically important sectors (such as utilities and telecommunications). Chile's FTA network and liberal foreign investor regime have also helped to diversify the economy into areas in which the country previously lacked comparative advantages, although a pronounced bias towards mining (the country's single largest industry and source of exports), and particularly copper, will persist. Chile's efforts to become a regional platform for multinational corporations will continue, facilitated by its reputation for relative economic stability and security, its well-developed financial system, and the quality of its transport and communications infrastructure, as well as a comprehensive network of FTAs, double-taxation agreements and investment-protection accords. Chile's track record in raising real incomes has made progress, with GDP per head-in US dollars at purchasing power parity (PPP)-increasing from 20% of US GDP per head in 1990 to 38.6% in 2019. This gradual convergence will continue as growth outpaces that of the US, reaching a forecast 63.1% by 2050.
Initial conditions: Chile is a small country, representing only a 0.2% share of the world population in 2020, but it overachieves in its share of world GDP (0.4% at PPP), and global exports are strong (0.4% of the total). Chile's GDP per head (at market exchange rates) of US$13,234 in 2020 was the second highest of Latin American economies (excluding the Caribbean), after Uruguay. In PPP terms, GDP per head was US$24,527 in 2020, which was the highest among non-Caribbean Latin American countries after Panama. In 2010 Chile became the second country in the region (after Mexico) to become a member of the OECD. Chile will continue to attract manufacturing investment, but its competitiveness as a global manufacturing centre will lag that of its Asian rivals, mainly owing to its small size. Chile will continue to find success in non-traditional production such as agro-industry and fisheries, and possibly some consumer goods, once Asia's labour-cost advantages erode. As a commodity producer, Chile faces more volatile terms of trade than its Asian competitors, whose comparative advantage is founded on low-cost manufacturing rather than raw materials. This implies that Chile's growth will remain strongly linked to international copper prices for the foreseeable future, notwithstanding a substantial diversification away from copper and commodities in general. The Chilean peso remains weak against its 20-year average, which will help to boost competitiveness for non-mining exports.
Demographic trends: Chile's long-term growth prospects will be undermined by its demographic outlook, which includes modest annual population growth of 0.2% in 2021-50, an ageing demographic profile and a low birth rate. We expect the working-age population to grow slightly in 2021-22, but it will start to shrink thereafter, pushing the dependency ratio up. Despite Chile's relative affluence and the quality of its social services, immigration has not significantly contributed to overall population growth in recent decades. Although it may begin to do so over the next decade, the effect will not be significant. As a result, the demographic outlook will be dominated by trends among the native-born population, whose birth rates will continue to fall.
External conditions: Growth in export industries will be boosted by Chile's large network of FTAs. However, the single most important external factor affecting the Chilean economy is the international price of copper. Prices are forecast to rise by almost 50% in 2021 amid external demand surge (particularly from China). Copper prices will continue to soar until 2023, after which they will drop slightly but will still remain significantly above the 2016-19 average. Chile has diversified its export base over the past 15 years, notably into non-traditional sectors such as fruit, salmon and wine. Nonetheless, mining (mainly copper) still accounts for approximately half of total exports, and we expect this dominance to diminish only marginally, given Chile's unique geological and geographical advantages in natural-resource extraction. Service exports will also grow, benefiting from Chile's position as a regional business hub. Open and liquid capital markets make the country the most developed financial centre in the region-and smaller in size only than Brazil and Mexico-with ample crossborder opportunities in banking, insurance and securities markets arising from deeper regional integration. Finally, growing international aware¬ness of the country's significant natural beauty will provide a major boost to tourism in the medium and long term.
Institutions and policy trends: Chile's ongoing constitutional reform process will have a significant impact on its long-standing pro-market policy direction, as it will shift focus towards increasing social spending and strengthening the social security net, as well as regulating private control over water and other natural resources to increase access (and even ownership) for local communities. Public-sector participation in certain sectors (such as pensions and utilities) will therefore increase, but we do not expect this to impair efficiency. Government investment in renewable energy to help the transition to clean energy sources will also increase over the long term. Civil service reforms will support bureaucracy efficiency and transparency, and reducing red tape will benefit the business environment as administrative procedures are simplified. Modernisation of the judiciary will accelerate legal procedures.
In the long term, modernising the education system and making the labour market more flexible will be necessary to unlock higher potential growth; both issues will be focus areas for policy under future administrations. The linking of Chile's north and central-south electricity grids in 2017 could revitalise the fragile energy matrix, which has resulted in Chile having some of the highest energy costs in the region. The lack of major fossil fuel reserves will provide an impetus towards developing renewable energy sources, and the country seems to be on track to generate 70% of its power from renewables by 2050. At the same time, there is significant opposition to major hydroelectric projects on environmental grounds, and some green alternatives such as solar energy remain expensive, suggesting that Chile will be burdened by energy insecurity in the medium term. Overall, we forecasts that, after a 7.5% rebound in growth in 2021 following the Covid-19 pandemic, annual GDP growth will average 2.6% in 2022-30 before dropping to 2.2% in 2030-50. As growth in the working-age population slows, economic expansion will become more dependent on productivity gains and less so on the contribution of labour.
Income and market size
  2020 2030 2050
Income and market size
Population (m) 19.1 19.5 20.3
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 253.0 496.9 1,382.6
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 13,230 25,540 68,040
Private consumption (US$ bn) 149.2 293.4 793.1
Private consumption per head (US$) 7,800 15,080 39,030
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 468.9 777.6 1,841.2
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 24,530 39,960 90,610
Exports of goods & services (US$ bn) 79.8 178.6 547.3
Imports of goods & services (US$ bn) 66.6 172.3 520.4
Memorandum items
GDP per head (at PPP; index, US=100) 38.8 42.9 50.6
Share of world population (%) 0.2 0.2 0.2
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.3 0.3 0.4
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.4 0.4 0.3
Share of world exports of goods & services (%) 0.4 0.4 0.4
Long-term outlook: Long-term trends Climate change and sustainability Chile's long coastline and diverse topography leave it highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. Changing climate dynamics will increase the likelihood and severity of natural disasters. These will directly disrupt agriculture and tourism, and glacial retreat will especially affect water resources. According to climate change projections by Chile's meteorological office, Chile's south-central area and the northern part of Patagonia should see temperatures rise and precipitation fall by about 60% between 2030 and 2059. Given that this is the heart of Chile's agricultural region and farmed salmon industry, this will have a serious impact on the Chilean economy.
Chile's climate policy has advanced in recent years. The president, Sebastián Piñera, has been pushing Chile's carbon-neutral agenda since 2019, when the country held the presidency of the UN Climate Change Conference. In early 2020 the country submitted a more ambitious update to its Paris Agreement target that would involve its carbon emissions peaking in 2025. As part of these agreements, the country has committed to ending coal power by 2040 and to expanding forest cover to act as "carbon sinks". A draft climate change bill (presented in January 2020) that sets a national target of achieving carbon neutrality by 2050 has been making its way through Congress. The bill will set a total greenhouse gas emissions budget for 2030 and 2050, along with adaptation goals for each sector, which must be met within ten years of the bill's passage (which The Economist Intelligence Unit anticipates will happen in 2022). Even though the bill has not yet been passed, efforts to achieve carbon neutrality are already under way; in January Mr Piñera promulgated the Energy Efficiency Law, which aims to reduce overall energy usage by 10% by 2030. Moreover, according to projections by a Climate Analytics (a Germany-based non-profit climate policy institute), if Chile implements all of its planned policies, its emissions could peak in 2023, two years ahead of its Paris Agreement target. Environmental policies-particularly a transition to renewable energy sources and more stringent restrictions on extractive sectors to mitigate the environmental impact of their projects-will occupy centre stage in the constitutional reform debate and will be prominent in the campaign platforms of several left-of-centre candidates in the November 2021 presidential election (such as Gabriel Boric). That said, Chile's Paris Agreement pledges fall short of what is required to limit global warming to between 2°C and 1.5°C. In 2019 we developed a model to calculate the impact of climate change on long-term growth; using this model, we believe that the Chilean economy will be 2.5% smaller in 2050 than it would have been without the impact of climate change.
An ageing demographic profile Chile's demographic profile shows an increasing proportion of the population over 65 years old. In 2019 11.9% of the population was over 65 years old. We expect this share to climb to 18.9% of the population by 2035. This makes Chile one of the oldest populations in Latin America and the Caribbean (behind only Cuba and Uruguay). In addition to a lower birth rate, this reflects an increase in life expectancy over the past 20 years as Chile has become a more affluent society. The ageing of the population presents a unique challenge for a developing country, where (until recently) providing sufficient economic growth and jobs for a working-age population was the biggest task.
The effect of Chile's ageing population has already been seen in the country's politics, with the state of the country's pension system becoming a major issue in the 2017 election, the 2019 protests and the ongoing constitutional reform process. It will also play a role in the upcoming November presidential election. The government has also had to address the fiscal costs of an ageing population by promoting the hiring of senior citizens (to keep them in the workforce) and incentivising the postponement of retirement. The government has also sought to increase the number of doctors specialising in geriatrics working in the public health system, and to adapt urban infrastructure to accommodate the needs of the elderly. The shrinking working-age population as a percentage of the overall population has also made immigration more attractive to Chilean policymakers. The country has bowed to political pressure to standardise its immigration system after a large inflow in 2015-17, but still remains committed to welcoming regulated (legal) inward immigration.
Long-term outlook: Methodology for long-term forecasts The time horizon for the detailed forecasts and analysis in the Country Forecast report is a five-year period. The Main report also carries a section on the long-term outlook, including projections of key macroeconomic and market size variables up to 2050. Depending on the indicator, average growth rates in a sub-period or values at select points in time are reported. Many companies make strategic business decisions over timeframes in excess of five years. The Economist Intelligence Unit's long-term projections will provide information to facilitate such decisions. Long-term forecasts and scenarios are also vital in understanding some of the big economic issues that will shape global business in the coming decades. We are well placed to build on and extend the five-year forecasts to produce long-term projections and scenarios because of the existing forward-looking analysis and models in the Country Forecast (in particular, the business environment rankings model). These are used to forecast some of the key drivers of long-run growth, as explained in detail below.
Growth projections The main building blocks for the long-term forecasts of key market and macroeconomic variables are long-run real GDP growth projections. We have estimated growth regressions that link real growth in GDP per head to a large set of growth determinants. The determinants of growth consist of the scope for convergence (based on initial GDP per worker at the start of a period); demographic variables; a set of policy variables (measuring the fiscal stance, openness to trade, and the government regulatory burden in product, credit and labour markets); a measure of institutional quality; geography (climate, location and the degree of primary export orientation); education levels and labour quality (as measured by mean years of schooling and life expectancy); the external economic environment (changes in the terms of trade); the level of development of information and communications technology (ICT); and historical legacies (history of independent statehood).
The regressions, which have high explanatory power for growth, allow us to forecast the long-term growth of real GDP per head for sub-periods up to 2050, on the basis of demographic projections and assumptions about the evolution of policy variables and other drivers of long-term growth.
Definitions of variables The dependent variable is GDPG: Average annual growth in real GDP per head, measured at national constant prices.
The independent variables include: LnGDPPL: The natural logarithm of GDP (adjusted for purchasing power parity-PPP) per worker (that is, per population aged 15-65) in constant 1980 US dollars at the start of each decade. Expressed as an index, US$=1.
LnSCHOOL: The natural logarithm of the mean years of schooling of the population aged over 15 at the start of each decade. Missing values for some countries are filled in by estimating mean years of schooling on the basis of an equation relating mean years of schooling (where available) to gross primary school enrolment ten years previously, and to secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios five years previously.
LnLIFEEXP: The natural logarithm of life expectancy at birth at the start of each decade. This variable also enters the equation in squared form, reflecting diminishing returns to growth of increases in life expectancy at high levels.
OPEN: Updated Sachs-Warner index of openness-the fraction of years during each decade in which a country is rated as an open economy according to the following four criteria: (1) average tariff rates below 40%; (2) average quota and licensing coverage of imports of less than 40%; (3) a black-market exchange-rate premium that averaged less than 20%; and (4) no extreme controls (taxes, quotas, state monopolies) on exports.
INST: Index of institutional quality (on a scale of 1-10) that is an average of five sub-indices of measures of the rule of law, quality of the bureaucracy, corruption, the risk of expropriation and the risk of government repudiation of contracts. Forecast values are based on corresponding indicators from our business environment rankings.
LABPOP: The difference between the growth rate of the working-age population (aged 15-65) and the growth rate of the total population in each decade.
TOT: The average annual rate of change of the terms of trade in a given decade.
GOVSAV: The average government savings ratio in each decade (current government revenue minus current government expenditure) expressed as a share of GDP.
TRADESH: The average share of trade (exports and imports of goods and services) in GDP, lagged by one decade to deal with the endogeneity of growth and trade.
GOVREG: An index on a scale of 1-10 of regulation of product, credit and labour markets. For forecast periods, the composite index is based on seven indicators from three categories of our business environment rankings model-from Policy towards private enterprise (ease of setting up new businesses, freedom to compete, price controls); from Financing (openness of the banking system, financial market distortions); and from Labour markets (restrictiveness of labour laws, wage regulation).
ICT: An index, on a scale of 1-10, of the development of information and communications infrastructure.
Control variables include PRIMARY: share of the exports of primary products in GDP at the start of a decade; TROPIC: percentage of the land area within a country that has a tropical climate; COLONY: history of independent statehood-a dummy variable taking the value of 1 if a country was a colony before 1945; and, in some specifications, regional dummy variables.
Summary of findings As in other studies, income per head and human capital are found to be important determinants of growth, with the coefficient on the logarithm of GDP per worker suggesting a relatively modest pace of convergence. The measures of institutional quality and of government regulation enter significantly in all specifications. We found a strong positive impact on growth of government savings and openness in all specifications. The criteria for classifying countries as open are quite permissive. The crucial aspect of trade policy captured by the measure is that it is a high level of distortion, rather than modest levels, that is deleterious for growth. The trade share variable is also moderately significant. The openness index (which is more of a true measure of policy) is hardly affected by the inclusion of trade/GDP shares in the equation. The correlation of the two measures is only .26. Although a tropical climate is highly significant, as is the share of primary exports in GDP, other geographic indicators-such as access to the sea, distance from major growth centres and the proportion of the population residing near coastlines-were not significant. A colonial past (pre-1945) is found to have a significant negative impact on growth, even in more recent periods.
Productivity growth The forecasts of GDP growth, of capital stock growth (based on estimated investment shares and assumed depreciation rates) and of growth in labour supply (based on projections of working-age population and assumptions on labour force participation) yield labour productivity growth and total factor productivity growth forecasts. The latter utilise the growth accounting identity, GY=b*GK+c*GL+A, where GY is growth of real GDP, GK growth of the capital stock and GL growth of human capital (the labour force adjusted for changes in skills). "A" stands for growth in total factor productivity; "b" and "c" are the shares of capital and labour in income. Trade values are forecast on the basis of simple import (function of GDP and relative prices) and export functions. Forecast market exchange rates (that is, the differential between PPP and market exchange rates) depend on the differential in labour productivity growth between a country and the US.
Data summary: Global outlook Global outlook
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
International assumptions (%)
World GDP growth 2.5 3.1 3.0 2.3 -3.8 5.4 4.1 3.0 2.8 2.7
US GDP growth 1.7 2.3 3.0 2.2 -3.5 6.0 3.7 2.2 1.9 2.0
Latin America growth -1.5 0.9 0.8 -0.5 -7.0 5.6 2.9 2.4 2.3 2.4
World trade growth 2.1 5.6 3.8 0.2 -8.1 8.0 5.6 4.7 4.2 4.3
US CPI 1.3 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.9 2.0
EU27 CPI 0.2 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 2.0 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
Industrial raw materials (export price) -2.2 20.2 2.2 -8.6 -3.2 32.7 -1.7 2.2 -9.2 0.8
Oil price (Brent; US$/b) 44.0 54.4 71.1 64.0 42.3 68.5 71.0 65.5 61.0 55.5
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate 0.5 1.1 2.1 2.2 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 1.6
US$:€ (av) 1.11 1.13 1.18 1.12 1.14 1.20 1.17 1.15 1.18 1.22
¥:€ (av) 120.4 126.6 130.5 122.1 121.8 129.9 129.4 128.6 132.8 135.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, current market prices Gross domestic product, at current market prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Expenditure on GDP (Ps bn at current market prices)
GDP 169,478 179,748 190,854 196,568 200,406 216,083 227,474 240,918 254,990 271,445
Private consumption 107,459 113,950 121,289 123,942 118,178 127,514 136,695 146,264 156,941 168,398
Government consumption 23,325 25,339 27,483 28,714 31,789 34,363 36,777 39,061 41,976 44,946
Gross fixed investment 38,665 37,667 40,927 44,955 41,845 46,446 49,415 52,573 55,826 59,109
Exports of goods & services 47,693 51,113 54,387 55,022 63,238 72,699 79,745 85,693 89,187 95,594
Imports of goods & services 46,567 48,810 54,894 56,652 52,748 66,796 76,256 83,180 89,446 97,109
Stockbuilding -854 468 1,392 179 -2,143 1,856 1,097 506 506 506
Domestic demand 168,594 177,423 191,092 197,789 189,669 210,180 223,984 238,405 255,250 272,960
Expenditure on GDP (US$ bn at current market prices)
GDP 250.4 277.0 297.6 279.5 253.0 297.4 307.4 327.3 353.2 379.3
Private consumption 158.7 175.6 189.2 176.2 149.2 175.5 184.7 198.7 217.4 235.3
Government consumption 34.5 39.1 42.9 40.8 40.1 47.3 49.7 53.1 58.1 62.8
Gross fixed investment 57.1 58.1 63.8 63.9 52.8 63.9 66.8 71.4 77.3 82.6
Exports of goods & services 70.5 78.8 84.8 78.2 79.8 100.0 107.8 116.4 123.5 133.6
Imports of goods & services 68.8 75.2 85.6 80.6 66.6 91.9 103.1 113.0 123.9 135.7
Stockbuilding -1.3 0.7 2.2 0.3 -2.7 2.6 1.5 0.7 0.7 0.7
Domestic demand 249.1 273.4 298.0 281.3 239.4 289.2 302.7 323.9 353.6 381.4
Economic structure (% of GDP at current market prices)
Private consumption 63.4 63.4 63.6 63.1 59.0 59.0 60.1 60.7 61.5 62.0
Government consumption 13.8 14.1 14.4 14.6 15.9 15.9 16.2 16.2 16.5 16.6
Gross fixed investment 22.8 21.0 21.4 22.9 20.9 21.5 21.7 21.8 21.9 21.8
Stockbuilding -0.5 0.3 0.7 0.1 -1.1 0.9 0.5 0.2 0.2 0.2
Exports of goods & services 28.1 28.4 28.5 28.0 31.6 33.6 35.1 35.6 35.0 35.2
Imports of goods & services 27.5 27.2 28.8 28.8 26.3 30.9 33.5 34.5 35.1 35.8
Memorandum items
Copper production ('000 tonnes) 5,571 5,655 5,773 5,860 5,977 6,067 6,158 6,250 6,344 6,439
National savings ratio (%) 24.3 23.5 25.7 26.9 20.3 20.2 19.5 19.1 18.0 17.6
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product, at constant prices Gross domestic product, at constant prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Real expenditure on GDP (Ps bn at constant 2003 prices)
GDP 145,816 147,867 153,434 154,780 145,517 156,459 160,637 164,647 168,633 172,606
Private consumption 93,029 96,191 99,868 100,953 93,243 101,857 105,496 108,591 111,341 113,896
Government consumption 19,765 20,674 21,367 21,374 20,578 21,463 22,300 23,058 23,773 24,415
Gross fixed investment 32,019 31,035 32,601 34,055 30,084 32,641 33,947 35,305 36,646 37,929
Exports of goods & services 43,943 43,260 45,617 44,458 43,969 46,057 47,669 49,290 51,114 53,159
Imports of goods & services 42,139 44,082 47,649 46,522 40,576 46,659 49,425 51,896 54,541 57,092
Stockbuilding -664 219 1,100 1,750 -1,270 1,100 650 300 300 300
Total domestic demand 144,148 148,119 154,936 158,132 142,635 157,061 162,392 167,253 172,059 176,540
Real expenditure on GDP (% change)
GDP 1.6 1.4 3.8 0.9 -6.0 7.5 2.7 2.5 2.4 2.4
Private consumption 2.7 3.4 3.8 1.1 -7.6 9.2 3.6 2.9 2.5 2.3
Government consumption 7.2 4.6 3.3 0.0 -3.7 4.3 3.9 3.4 3.1 2.7
Gross fixed investment -1.3 -3.1 5.0 4.5 -11.7 8.5 4.0 4.0 3.8 3.5
Exports of goods & services 0.5 -1.6 5.4 -2.5 -1.1 4.8 3.5 3.4 3.7 4.0
Imports of goods & services 0.9 4.6 8.1 -2.4 -12.8 15.0 5.9 5.0 5.1 4.7
Stockbuilding (% contribution to GDP growth) -0.2 0.6 0.6 0.4 -2.0 1.6 -0.3 -0.2 0.0 0.0
Total domestic demand 2.1 2.8 4.6 2.1 -9.8 10.1 3.4 3.0 2.9 2.6
Real contribution to GDP growth (% points)
Private consumption 1.7 2.2 2.5 0.7 -5.0 5.9 2.3 1.9 1.7 1.5
Government consumption 0.9 0.6 0.5 0.0 -0.5 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4
Gross fixed investment -0.3 -0.7 1.1 0.9 -2.6 1.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8
External balance -0.1 -1.8 -0.8 0.0 3.5 -2.7 -0.7 -0.5 -0.5 -0.3
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Gross domestic product by sector of origin Gross domestic product by sector of origin
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Origin of GDP (Ps bn at constant 2003 prices)
GDP at factor cost 133,581 134,869 139,826 141,207 133,094 143,103 146,924 150,592 154,237 157,871
Agriculture 5,076 5,189 5,308 5,288 5,148 5,328 5,525 5,746 5,987 6,239
Industry 43,505 43,276 44,956 44,866 43,222 45,383 47,243 49,322 51,640 54,067
Services 82,107 83,348 86,502 87,957 83,076 90,594 92,323 93,664 94,729 95,666
Origin of GDP (real % change)
Agriculture 2.3 2.2 2.3 -0.4 -2.6 3.5 3.7 4.0 4.2 4.2
Industry -0.2 -0.5 3.9 -0.2 -3.7 5.0 4.1 4.4 4.7 4.7
Services 2.5 1.5 3.8 1.7 -5.5 9.0 1.9 1.5 1.1 1.0
Origin of GDP (% of factor cost GDP)
Agriculture 4.4 4.4 3.9 3.9 4.2 4.1 4.1 4.2 4.2 4.3
Industry 31.6 32.2 32.2 31.8 34.2 33.4 33.9 34.5 35.3 36.1
Services 64.1 63.4 63.9 64.2 61.5 62.5 62.0 61.3 60.5 59.6
Memorandum item
Industrial production (% change) -2.6 -0.4 2.9 c -0.7 c -4.5 c 4.5 3.6 3.9 4.0 4.0
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Growth and productivity Growth and productivity
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Growth and productivity (%)
Labour productivity growth 1.0 0.8 2.7 0.2 -3.6 4.6 0.2 0.5 0.5 0.4
Total factor productivity growth -0.4 -0.3 1.7 -1.0 -5.2 4.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0
Growth of capital stock 4.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 2.3 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.2
Growth of potential GDP 2.5 2.4 4.4 1.6 -3.4 6.3 1.4 1.4 1.3 1.3
Growth of real GDP 1.6 c 1.4 c 3.8 c 0.9 c -6.0 c 7.5 2.7 2.5 2.4 2.4
Growth of real GDP per head 0.3 c 0.0 c 2.3 c -0.3 c -6.8 7.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.3
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Actual.
Data summary: Economic structure, income and market size Economic structure, income and market size
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Population, income and market size
Population (m) 18.2 18.5 18.7 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.3 19.2 19.2 19.2
GDP (US$ bn at market exchange rates) 250.4 277.0 297.6 279.5 253.0 a 297.4 307.4 327.3 353.2 379.3
GDP per head (US$ at market exchange rates) 13,750 15,000 15,890 14,750 13,230 15,480 15,970 17,000 18,360 19,710
Private consumption (US$ bn) 158.7 175.6 189.2 176.2 149.2 a 175.5 184.7 198.7 217.4 235.3
Private consumption per head (US$) 8,720 9,510 10,100 9,300 7,800 9,130 9,600 10,320 11,300 12,230
GDP (US$ bn at PPP) 426.6 452.0 463.4 492.7 468.9 511.2 536.4 563.0 588.1 612.8
GDP per head (US$ at PPP) 23,430 24,470 24,740 26,000 24,530 26,610 27,860 29,250 30,570 31,850
Personal disposable income (Ps bn) 117,652 124,758 132,794 135,698 129,388 141,206 152,175 163,558 176,138 189,485
Personal disposable income (US$ bn) 173.8 192.3 207.1 193.0 163.3 194.3 205.7 222.2 244.0 264.8
Growth of real disposable income (%) 2.7 3.4 3.8 1.1 b -7.6 10.5 4.1 3.4 2.9 2.6
Memorandum items
Share of world population (%) 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25
Share of world GDP (% at market exchange rates) 0.33 0.34 0.35 0.32 0.30 a 0.32 0.32 0.32 0.33 0.33
Share of world GDP (% at PPP) 0.37 0.38 0.36 0.37 0.36 0.37 0.36 0.36 0.35 0.35
Share of world exports (%) 0.39 0.40 0.39 0.37 0.43 a 0.46 0.47 0.49 0.49 0.51
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Fiscal indicators Fiscal indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
Fiscal indicators (% of GDP)
Central government expenditure 23.4 23.6 23.5 24.4 27.2 a 29.2 27.9 27.4 26.6 26.2
Interest 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 b 1.0 1.1 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.1
Non-interest 22.6 22.8 22.7 23.4 b 26.2 28.1 26.4 25.7 24.7 24.1
Central government revenue 20.7 20.8 21.9 21.5 19.9 a 22.1 22.0 22.4 23.1 23.6
Central government balance -2.7 -2.8 -1.7 -2.9 -7.3 a -7.1 -5.9 -5.0 -3.5 -2.6
Primary balance -2.0 -1.9 -0.8 -1.9 b -6.3 -6.0 -4.4 -3.3 -1.7 -0.5
Public debt 21.0 23.6 25.6 28.2 32.5 36.8 40.4 42.7 43.3 42.7
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Monetary indicators Monetary indicators
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Monetary indicators
Exchange rate Ps:US$ (av) 676.9 648.9 641.2 703.3 792.2 726.6 740.0 736.0 721.9 715.6
Exchange rate Ps:US$ (end-period) 667.3 615.2 695.7 744.6 711.2 762.0 757.5 724.6 719.6 712.8
Exchange rate Ps:€ (av) 749.1 732.7 757.6 787.4 904.1 868.6 865.8 844.6 848.2 869.5
Exchange rate Ps:€ (end-period) 703.4 737.8 796.6 836.5 872.8 899.1 878.7 833.3 859.9 876.7
Real effective exchange-rate index (av), CPI-based 92.6 c 95.7 c 97.1 c 92.5 c 84.9 c 88.5 88.4 89.7 91.4 91.8
Purchasing power parity Ps:US$ (av) 397.3 397.7 411.8 398.9 427.4 422.7 424.1 427.9 433.6 442.9
Money supply (M2) growth (%) 7.0 5.1 11.2 9.4 6.1 c 8.3 5.3 5.9 5.1 3.9
Domestic credit growth (%) 6.0 6.4 10.1 10.8 9.4 c 3.6 4.3 1.3 5.5 4.3
Short-term lending rate (av; %) 5.6 4.6 4.2 3.2 c 3.8 c 4.4 4.8 5.5 5.5 5.5
Deposit rate (av; %) 3.8 2.9 2.7 2.5 0.9 0.5 0.8 1.6 2.3 2.7
Money market rate (av; %) 3.5 2.5 2.8 1.8 0.5 0.8 1.8 2.3 2.8 3.3
Long-term interest rate (av; %) 4.4 4.2 4.5 3.5 2.8 3.4 3.6 4.0 4.4 4.8
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Employment, wages and prices Employment, wages and prices
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 b 2020 b 2021 c 2022 c 2023 c 2024 c 2025 c
The labour market (av)
Labour force (m) 8.8 9.0 b 9.2 b 9.3 9.5 9.5 9.6 9.6 9.6 9.7
Labour force (% change) 2.0 2.1 b 2.0 b 1.8 1.4 0.9 0.5 0.3 0.2 0.3
Employment (m) 8.2 8.2 8.3 8.4 8.2 8.4 8.6 8.8 8.9 9.1
Employment (% change) 0.6 0.6 1.0 0.7 -2.5 2.8 2.5 2.0 1.9 1.9
Unemployment (m) 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.3 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.7 0.6
Unemployment rate (%) 6.2 6.5 7.1 7.1 a 10.3 a 9.6 8.4 7.8 7.1 6.7
Wage and price inflation (%)
Consumer prices (av) 3.8 2.2 2.3 2.3 a 3.0 a 3.6 3.0 2.7 2.8 2.8
Consumer prices (end-period) 2.7 2.3 2.1 3.0 a 2.9 a 3.9 2.5 2.8 2.9 2.7
Producer prices (av) -0.7 9.7 4.9 1.9 a 6.9 a 24.8 6.1 3.5 4.2 4.3
GDP deflator (av) 4.5 4.6 2.3 2.1 8.4 0.3 2.5 3.3 3.3 4.0
Private consumption deflator (av) 3.7 2.6 2.5 1.1 3.2 -1.2 3.5 4.0 4.6 4.9
Government consumption deflator (av) 5.1 3.9 4.9 4.4 15.0 3.6 3.0 2.7 4.2 4.3
Fixed investment deflator (av) 3.4 0.5 3.4 5.2 5.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3
Average nominal wages 4.0 5.7 4.5 4.6 a 3.7 a 5.2 4.8 5.0 5.3 5.3
Average real wages 0.2 3.5 2.0 2.0 a 0.6 a 0.8 1.7 2.2 2.5 2.4
Unit labour costs (Ps-based; av) 3.0 b 4.9 b 1.7 b 4.5 7.5 0.6 4.6 4.5 4.8 4.8
Unit labour costs (US$-based) -0.5 b 9.4 b 2.9 b -4.8 -4.6 9.7 2.7 5.1 6.8 5.7
Labour costs per hour (Ps) 2,852.8 b 3,016.3 b 3,152.3 b 3,298.6 3,419.4 3,597.2 3,769.9 3,958.4 4,168.2 4,389.1
Labour costs per hour (US$) 4.2 b 4.6 b 4.9 b 4.7 4.3 5.0 5.1 5.4 5.8 6.1
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. c Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data summary: Current account and terms of trade Current account and terms of trade
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Current account (US$ bn)
Current-account balance -5.0 -6.4 -11.6 -10.5 3.4 -1.0 -2.6 -3.6 -7.8 -9.3
Current-account balance (% of GDP) -2.0 -2.3 -3.9 -3.7 1.3 -0.4 -0.8 -1.1 -2.2 -2.5
Goods: exports fob 60.7 68.8 74.7 68.8 73.5 93.5 102.4 111.0 117.7 127.8
Goods: imports fob -55.9 -61.5 -70.5 -65.8 -55.1 -76.6 -85.8 -94.1 -103.1 -112.8
Trade balance 4.9 7.4 4.2 3.0 18.4 16.9 16.6 16.8 14.6 15.0
Services: credit 9.5 9.8 9.9 9.3 6.3 7.4 8.4 9.3 10.2 11.0
Services: debit -12.8 -13.6 -14.6 -14.4 -11.3 -13.3 -15.1 -16.3 -17.8 -18.6
Services balance -3.3 -3.8 -4.7 -5.1 -5.0 -5.9 -6.6 -7.0 -7.6 -7.7
Primary income: credit 5.9 6.6 7.3 8.9 7.4 6.5 7.1 7.5 8.0 8.8
Primary income: debit -13.4 -17.6 -20.3 -18.4 -17.7 -19.4 -20.3 -22.0 -24.3 -27.2
Primary income balance -7.5 -11.0 -13.0 -9.5 -10.3 -12.9 -13.3 -14.6 -16.3 -18.3
Secondary income: credit 3.4 4.1 5.5 5.1 4.5 4.4 4.9 5.2 6.3 6.8
Secondary income: debit -2.1 -2.6 -3.1 -3.2 -3.6 -3.6 -4.2 -4.1 -4.8 -5.1
Secondary income balance 1.3 1.5 2.4 1.8 1.0 0.8 0.7 1.1 1.6 1.7
Terms of trade
Export price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 58.0 69.7 72.3 62.2 57.4 69.3 72.4 75.8 77.2 80.3
Export prices (% change) -5.7 20.3 3.7 -14.0 -7.8 20.8 4.4 4.7 1.9 4.0
Import price index (US$-based; 2010=100) 64.0 69.9 74.7 65.4 54.8 66.0 70.1 73.3 76.4 80.0
Import prices (% change) -9.3 9.3 6.8 -12.5 -16.2 20.5 6.2 4.5 4.3 4.7
Terms of trade (2006=100) 90.6 99.7 96.8 95.2 104.7 105.0 103.3 103.4 101.1 100.4
Memorandum item
Export market growth (%) 2.2 6.7 4.3 -0.4 c -3.2 c 8.9 5.5 4.3 4.2 2.9
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: Foreign direct investment Foreign direct investment
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
Foreign direct investment (US$ bn)
Inward direct investment c 12.3 6.1 7.8 12.6 8.5 10.4 8.5 9.0 10.4 11.9
Inward direct investment (% of GDP) 4.9 2.2 2.6 4.5 3.4 3.5 2.8 2.8 2.9 3.1
Inward direct investment (% of gross fixed investment) 21.6 10.6 12.2 19.7 16.1 16.3 12.7 12.6 13.4 14.5
Outward direct investment -8.5 -3.5 -1.3 -9.3 -11.7 -9.4 -9.4 -10.2 -10.1 -11.4
Net foreign direct investment 3.8 2.6 6.5 3.2 -3.2 1.0 -0.9 -1.2 0.3 0.5
Stock of inward direct investment 197.3 219.1 216.1 215.7 224.2 234.6 243.1 252.1 262.5 274.5
Stock of inward direct investment per head (US$) 10,836 11,860 11,540 11,379 11,727 12,211 12,629 13,099 13,645 14,265
Stock of inward direct investment (% of GDP) 78.8 79.1 72.6 77.2 88.6 78.9 79.1 77.0 74.3 72.4
Memorandum items
Share of world inward direct investment flows (%) 0.46 0.28 1.58 0.96 0.67 0.74 0.57 0.58 0.65 0.71
Share of world inward direct investment stock (%) 0.70 0.73 0.67 0.63 0.67 d 0.64 0.63 0.62 0.62 0.63
a Actual. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts. c Includes intra-company loans, also registered in our External Debt data series. d Economist Intelligence Unit estimates.
Data summary: External debt External debt
  2016 a 2017 a 2018 a 2019 a 2020 a 2021 b 2022 b 2023 b 2024 b 2025 b
External debt
Total external debt (US$ bn) 161.5 177.5 181.9 194.9 209.0 215.9 222.5 226.4 231.6 236.6
Total external debt (% of GDP) 64.5 64.1 61.1 69.7 82.6 72.6 72.4 69.2 65.6 62.4
Debt/exports ratio (%) 212.1 208.4 197.8 224.1 239.6 201.0 188.8 177.3 170.6 160.3
Debt-service ratio, paid (%) 32.6 30.3 31.6 34.7 32.0 28.0 24.8 21.9 20.8 20.1
a Economist Intelligence Unit estimates. b Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
Data sources and definitions The sources for global and domestic data refer to historical data. The source for all forecast data, unless otherwise stated, is The Economist Intelligence Unit
Global data Manufactures price: UN, Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
Non-oil commodities: Economist Intelligence Unit aggregate
Oil prices: dated Brent
Ps:US$ exchange rate: IMF, IFS; nominal weighted index, 1990=100
US and OECD consumer price inflation: OECD
US and OECD GDP growth: OECD
US$ 3-month commercial paper rate: IMF, IFS
World copper prices: Economist Intelligence Unit aggregate
World GDP and trade growth: Economist Intelligence Unit aggregate
Domestic data Average copper price: LME, quoted in BCCh, Boletín Mensual
Balance of payments: BCCh
Budget balance: non-financial public sector (NFPS) balance only; Ministerio de Hacienda
Copper production: BCCh, Boletín Mensual; m tonnes of all copper products
Debt-service ratio: ratio of total debt service paid to exports of goods and services
Demographic profile data: UN, population projections, medium variant; ILO, labour force projections
Exchange rate: BCCh; market rates expressed as Ps:US$
GDP growth by demand component: Banco Central de Chile (BCCh, the central bank), Boletín Mensual; 2003 prices
GDP per head: US$ GDP divided by population
Inflation: BCCh; December 1998=100
Interest rates: IFS; bank rate offered (charged) on deposits (loans) of 30-89 days; given in annual terms by compounding weighted average monthly rates
PPP: purchasing power parity, average ratio of prices in Chile to prices in the US
Real exchange rate: ratio of estimated annual average purchasing power parity (PPP) for tradeable products to annual average exchange rate
Real GDP growth per head: real growth in GDP deflated by population growth
Total debt service: World Bank, Global Development Finance; principal repayments made against long-term debt, plus interest payments and IMF charges paid against total external debt
Total external debt: World Bank, Global Development Finance
US$ copper exports: BCCh, Boletín Mensual
US$ GDP: IFS; current prices, from local currency at annual average exchange rate
Wage and salary inflation: BCCh
Wage costs and unemployment rate: BCCh, Boletín Mensual
Abbreviations IFS: International Financial Statistics
ILO: International Labour Organisation
IMF: International Monetary Fund
LME: London Metal Exchange
Guide to the business rankings model Outline of the model The business rankings model measures the quality or attractiveness of the business environment in the 82 countries covered by Country Forecast using a standard analytical framework. It is designed to reflect the main criteria used by companies to formulate their global business strategies, and is based not only on historical conditions but also on expectations about conditions prevailing over the next five years. This allows The Economist Intelligence Unit to utilise the regularity, depth and detail of its forecasting work to generate a unique set of forward-looking business environment rankings on a regional and global basis.
The business rankings model examines 11 separate criteria or categories, covering the political environment, the macroeconomic environment, market opportunities, policy towards free enterprise and competition, policy towards foreign investment, foreign trade and exchange controls, taxes, financing, the labour market, infrastructure and technological readiness. Each category contains a number of indicators that are assessed by The Economist Intelligence Unit for the last five years and the next five years. The number of indicators in each category varies from five (foreign trade and exchange regimes) to 13 (political environment), and there are 91 indicators in total.
Almost half of the indicators are based on quantitative data (eg GDP growth), and are mostly drawn from national and international statistical sources for the historical period (2016-20) and from Economist Intelligence Unit assessments for the forecast period (2021-25). The other indicators are qualitative in nature (eg quality of the financial regulatory system), and are drawn from a range of data sources and business surveys adjusted by The Economist Intelligence Unit for 2016-20. All forecasts for the qualitative indicators covering 2021-25 are based on Economist Intelligence Unit assessments.
Sources used in the business rankings model include Akamai Technologies, State of the Internet; CIA, World Factbook; The Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Risk Service, Country Commerce, Democracy Index, Risk Briefing; IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; International Institute for Management Development, World Competitiveness Yearbook; International Labour Organisation, International Labour Statistics Yearbook; International Telecommunication Union, ICT Indicators Database; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index; UN Conference on Trade and Development, Ecommerce Index; World Bank, World Development Indicators, Doing Business; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index; World Intellectual Property Organisation, IP Facts and Figures.
Calculating the rankings The rankings are calculated in several stages. First, each of the 91 indicators is scored on a scale from 1 (very bad for business) to 5 (very good for business). The aggregate category scores are derived on the basis of simple or weighted averages of the indicator scores within a given category. These are then adjusted, on the basis of a linear transformation, to produce index values on a 1-10 scale. An arithmetic average of the ten category index values is then calculated to yield the aggregate business environment score for each country, again on a 1-10 scale.
The use of equal weights for the categories to derive the overall score reflects in part the theoretical uncertainty about the relative importance of the primary determinants of investment. Surveys of foreign direct investors' intentions yield widely differing results on the relative importance of different factors. Weighted scores for individual categories based on correlation coefficients of recent foreign direct investment inflows do not in any case produce overall results that are significantly different from those derived from a system based on equal weights.
For most quantitative indicators the data are arrayed in ascending or descending order and split into five bands (quintiles). The countries falling in the first quintile are assigned scores of 5, those falling in the second quintile score 4 and so on. The cut-off points between bands are based on the average of the raw indicator values for the top and bottom countries in adjacent quintiles. The 2016-20 ranges are then used to derive 2021-25 scores. This allows for intertemporal as well as cross-country comparisons of the indicator and category scores.
Measurement and grading issues The indices and rankings attempt to measure the average quality of the business environment over the entire historical or forecast period, not simply at the start or at the end of the period. Thus, in the forecast we assign an average grade to elements of the business environment over 2021-25, not to the likely situation in 2025 only.
The scores based on quantitative data are usually calculated on the basis of the numeric average for an indicator over the period. In some cases, the "average" is represented, as an approximation, by the recorded value at the mid-point of the period (2018 or 2023). In only a few cases is the relevant variable appropriately measured by the value at the start of the period (eg educational attainments). For one indicator (the natural resources endowment), the score remains constant for both the historical and forecast periods.
Indicator scores in the business rankings model   2016-20   2021-25  
  Chile Regional average a Chile Regional average a
Political environment        
  1. Risk of armed conflict 5 4.3 5 4.3
  2. Risk of social unrest 4 2.8 2 2.1
  3. Constitutional mechanisms for the orderly transfer of power 4 3.3 5 3.3
  4. Government and opposition 5 3.3 3 2.9
  5. Threat of politically motivated violence 4 3.6 4 3.5
  6. International disputes or tensions 4 3.3 4 3.1
  7. Government policy towards business 4 3.2 3 3.2
  8. Effectiveness of political system in policy formulation and execution 4 2.5 3 2.4
  9. Quality of the bureaucracy 4 2.6 4 2.8
 10. Transparency and fairness of legal system 4 2.5 5 2.6
 11. Efficiency of legal system 4 2.3 4 2.3
 12. Corruption 4 2.2 4 2.3
 13. Impact of crime 4 2.6 4 2.5
Macroeconomic environment        
  1. Inflation* 5 4.1 4 3.7
  2. Budget balance as % of GDP* 3 2.4 3 2.7
  3. Government debt as % of GDP* 5 3.6 4 2.7
  4. Exchange-rate volatility* 4 3.8 5 3.8
  5. Current-account balance as % of GDP* 4 4.1 4 4.2
  6. Quality of policymaking 5 3.1 5 3.0
  7. Institutional underpinnings 4 3.3 4 3.2
  8. Asset prices 3 2.8 3 2.7
Market opportunities        
  1. GDP, US$ bn at PPP* 4 3.4 4 3.3
  2. GDP per head, US$ at PPP* 4 2.9 4 2.9
  3. Real GDP growth* 1 1.3 3 3.2
  4. Share of world merchandise trade* 2 1.9 3 2.0
  5. Average annual rate of growth of exports* 1 1.1 2 2.8
  6. Average annual rate of growth of imports* 1 1.0 3 3.1
  7. The natural resource endowment* 3 3.2 3 3.2
  8. Profitability* 1 1.3 3 3.8
  9. Regional integration 3 3.0 4 3.1
 10. Proximity to markets 1 2.4 1 2.1
Policy towards private enterprise and competition        
  1. Degree to which private property rights are protected 5 3.2 5 3.1
  2. Government regulation on setting up new private businesses* 4 2.8 4 2.8
  3. Freedom of existing businesses to compete 5 3.2 4 3.0
  4. Promotion of competition 4 2.6 4 2.8
  5. Protection of intellectual property 4 2.5 4 2.7
  6. Price controls 5 3.4 5 3.6
  7. Distortions arising from lobbying by special interest groups 4 2.3 3 2.0
  8. Distortions arising from state ownership/control 4 2.9 3 2.7
  9. Minority shareholders 4 2.6 4 2.8
Policy towards foreign investment        
  1. Government policy towards foreign capital 5 3.4 5 3.4
  2. Openness of national culture to foreign influences 4 3.8 4 3.8
  3. Risk of expropriation of foreign assets 5 3.4 5 3.2
  4. Availability of investment protection schemes 5 3.1 5 3.3
  5. Government favouritism 5 3.1 5 3.0
Foreign trade and exchange controls        
  1. Capital-account liberalisation 5 3.8 5 3.8
  2. Tariff and non-tariff protection* 5 3.6 5 3.8
  3. Ease of trading* 4 3.2 4 3.1
  4. Openness of trade* 3 3.2 3 3.5
  5. Restrictions on the current account 5 4.3 5 4.3
Taxes        
  1. The corporate tax burden* 4 3.7 3 3.6
  2. The top marginal personal income tax* 4 4.5 4 4.2
  3. Value-added tax* 3 3.1 3 3.0
  4. Employers' social security contributions* 5 3.3 4 3.3
  5. Degree to which fiscal regime encourages new investment 4 2.7 5 2.8
  6. Consistency and fairness of the tax system 4 2.6 4 2.8
  7. Tax complexity 3 2.3 4 2.3
Financing        
  1 Health and soundness of banking sector 4 2.9 4 2.9
  2. Stockmarket capitalisation* 4 2.5 5 2.8
  3. Distortions in financial markets* 4 3.3 4 3.2
  4. Quality of the financial regulatory system 4 2.9 4 2.9
  5. Access of foreigners to local capital market 5 3.1 5 3.2
  6. Access to medium-term finance for investment 4 2.6 4 2.8
The labour market        
  1. Labour costs adjusted for productivity* 4 4.2 3 4.1
  2. Availability of skilled labour* 3 3.2 4 3.4
  3. Quality of workforce* 4 3.0 4 2.8
  4. Degree to which language skills meet business needs 3 3.0 3 3.1
  5. Health of the workforce* 5 3.9 5 4.0
  6. Level of technical skills 3 3.0 4 3.0
  7. Cost of living* 4 3.5 3 3.7
  8. Incidence of strikes* 3 3.0 3 2.9
  9. Restrictiveness of labour laws 3 2.6 3 2.7
 10. Extent of wage regulation 4 3.2 3 3.3
 11. Hiring of foreign nationals 4 3.8 5 3.8
Infrastructure        
  1. Mobile network coverage* 3 2.3 3 3.1
  2. Broadband connection speed* 1 1.2 3 2.6
  3. The infrastructure for retail and wholesale distribution* 3 2.4 4 2.5
  4. Extent and quality of road network* 3 3.0 4 3.3
  5. Extent and quality of rail network* 4 2.3 4 2.5
  6. Quality of the ports' infrastructure* 4 2.9 4 3.0
  7. Quality of air transport infrastructure* 4 3.1 4 3.2
  8. Reliability of electricity supply* 4 2.0 4 2.2
  9. Rents of office space* 4 3.7 4 3.8
Technological readiness        
  1. Patent applications* 3 2.3 3 2.3
  2. Quality of e-commerce business environment* 4 3.0 4 3.3
  3. Scope of e-government* 3 2.4 5 2.9
  4. Cyber-security preparedness* 4 3.3 4 3.1
  5. Internet use* 4 2.8 5 3.3
  6. Mobile phone subscriptions* 3 2.3 3 2.5
  7. R&D as % of GDP* 2 2.3 3 2.3
  8. Research infrastructure* 3 2.8 3 2.8
Note. An asterisk (*) denotes scores based wholly or in part on quantitative indicators. All other indicators are qualitative in nature.
a  Out of 12 countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

Subject: Tax rates; Foreign exchange rates; Labor force; Politics; Pandemics; Foreign investment; Consumer goods; Consumption; International trade; Purchasing power parity; Population growth; Gross Domestic Product--GDP; Central banks; Presidential elections; Economic growth; Tax reform; Economic forecasts

Business indexing term: Subject: Tax rates Foreign exchange rates Labor force Foreign investment Consumer goods Consumption International trade Purchasing power parity Gross Domestic Product--GDP Central banks Economic growth Tax reform Economic forecasts; Industry: 92111 :‎ Executive Offices 52111 :‎ Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Location: Chile; Latin America

Company / organization: Name: Economist Intelligence Unit; NAICS: 516210

Classification: 92111: Executive Offices; 52111: Monetary Authorities-Central Bank

Identifier / keyword: Chile; Latin America

Title: Country Forecast Chile August 2021

Publication title: Country Forecast. Chile; New York

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: New York

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics, Political Science

ISSN: 09669310

e-ISSN: 20489242

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Statistics, Country Report

Document feature: Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2611016489

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-forecast-chile-august-2021/docview/2611016489/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Last updated: 2024-11-14

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Latvia 3rd Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-latvia-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2623230179/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Latvia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Latvia+3rd+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Latvia&amp;rft.issn=14626713&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Latvia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Latvia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Latvia 3rd Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Latvia; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 14626713

e-ISSN: 20475152

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2623230179

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-latvia-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2623230179/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-01-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Finland 3rd Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-finland-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2623230105/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Finland&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Finland+3rd+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Finland&amp;rft.issn=02695901&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Finland; Western Europe

Identifier / keyword: Finland; Western Europe

Title: Country Report Finland 3rd Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Finland; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695901

e-ISSN: 20474008

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2623230105

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-finland-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2623230105/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-01-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Singapore August 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-singapore-august-2021/docview/2623229917/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Singapore&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Singapore+August+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Singapore&amp;rft.issn=02696711&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Singapore; Asia-Pacific region

Identifier / keyword: Singapore; Asia-Pacific region

Title: Country Report Singapore August 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Singapore; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02696711

e-ISSN: 20475780

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2623229917

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-singapore-august-2021/docview/2623229917/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-01-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Slovenia 3rd Quarter 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-slovenia-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2623229826/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Slovenia&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Slovenia+3rd+Quarter+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-08-01&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Slovenia&amp;rft.issn=13664131&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Slovenia; Eastern Europe

Identifier / keyword: Slovenia; Eastern Europe

Title: Country Report Slovenia 3rd Quarter 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Slovenia; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Aug 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Political Science, Business And Economics--Economic Systems And Theories, Economic History

ISSN: 13664131

e-ISSN: 20475802

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2623229826

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-slovenia-3rd-quarter-2021/docview/2623229826/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-01-28

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report Venezuela July 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-july-2021/docview/2618414949/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+Venezuela+July+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-07-15&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+Venezuela&amp;rft.issn=13507133&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Venezuela; Latin America

Identifier / keyword: Venezuela; Latin America

Title: Country Report Venezuela July 2021

Publication title: Country Report. Venezuela; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Jul 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 13507133

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2618414949

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-venezuela-july-2021/docview/2618414949/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-01-11

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report South Africa July 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-south-africa-july-2021/docview/2618414351/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+South+Africa&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+South+Africa+July+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-07-15&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+South+Africa&amp;rft.issn=02696738&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: South Africa; Africa

Identifier / keyword: South Africa; Africa

Title: Country Report South Africa July 2021

Publication title: Country Report. South Africa; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Jul 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02696738

e-ISSN: 20475810

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2618414351

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-south-africa-july-2021/docview/2618414351/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-01-11

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Country Report United Kingdom July 2021

https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-united-kingdom-july-2021/docview/2617655598/se-2?accountid=14357

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://VS2GA4MQ9G.search.serialssolutions.com?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/ProQ%3Apoliticalscience&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.genre=unknown&amp;rft.jtitle=Country+Report.+United+Kingdom&amp;rft.atitle=Country+Report+United+Kingdom+July+2021&amp;rft.au=&amp;rft.aulast=&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2021-07-12&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.isbn=&amp;rft.btitle=&amp;rft.title=Country+Report.+United+Kingdom&amp;rft.issn=02695472&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: Not available.

Location: Western Europe; United Kingdom--UK

Identifier / keyword: United Kingdom; Western Europe

Title: Country Report United Kingdom July 2021

Publication title: Country Report. United Kingdom; London

Publication year: 2021

Publication date: Jul 2021

Publisher: The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: United Kingdom

Publication subject: Business And Economics--Economic Situation And Conditions, Business And Economics--International Commerce

ISSN: 02695472

e-ISSN: 20476027

Source type: Report

Language of publication: English

Document type: Country Report, Statistics

Document feature: Country description; Country economic indicators; Country economic forecasts; Country risk

ProQuest document ID: 2617655598

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/reports/country-report-united-kingdom-july-2021/docview/2617655598/se-2?accountid=14357

Copyright: © 2021 The Economist Intelligence Unit Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. No further reproduction is permitted.

Full text availability: This publication may be subject to restrictions within certain markets, including corporations, non-profits, government institutions, and public libraries. In those cases records will be visible to users, but not full text.

Last updated: 2022-10-16

Database: Social Science Premium Collection

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://about.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Database copyright © 2025 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: https://www.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions